Title: Draft Genome Sequences of Various Bacterial Phyla Isolated from the International Space Station
URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8086211/

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.

Primary site navigation

Logged in as:

Address correspondence to Kasthuri Venkateswaran, kasthuri.j.venkateswaran@jpl.nasa.gov .

Citation Simpson AC, Urbaniak C, Singh NK, Wood JM, Debieu M, O’Hara NB, Mason CE, Venkateswaran K. 2021. Draft genome sequences of various bacterial phyla isolated from the International Space Station. Microbiol Resour Announc 10:e00214-21. https://doi.org/10.1128/MRA.00214-21 .

Corresponding author.

Received 2021 Mar 4; Accepted 2021 Mar 31; Collection date 2021 Apr.

This is a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.

Whole-genome sequences were generated from 96 bacterial strains of 14 species that were isolated from International Space Station surfaces during the Microbial Tracking 2 study. Continued characterization of this closed habitat's microbiome enables tracking of the spread and evolution of secondary pathogens, which is vital for astronaut health.

Whole-genome sequences were generated from 96 bacterial strains of 14 species that were isolated from International Space Station surfaces during the Microbial Tracking 2 study. Continued characterization of this closed habitat's microbiome enables tracking of the spread and evolution of secondary pathogens, which is vital for astronaut health.

The International Space Station (ISS) is currently the only long-term human habitat in space. Microgravity disrupts human immune function ( 1 ), and close monitoring of the ISS microbiome for increased pathogenicity is thus an ongoing critical task. Here, we report the draft genomes of 96 bacterial strains that were isolated from the ISS ( Table 1 ). Eleven of the 14 species found are common members of the human microbiome, and most can act as opportunistic human pathogens.

Accession numbers, sampling locations, and assembly details for bacterial strains isolated from the ISS

WHC, waste and hygiene compartment; ARED, advanced resistive exercise device; PMM, permanent multipurpose module.

BA, blood agar.

Four species from the phylum Actinobacteria were isolated, from the genera Pseudoclavibacter , Kocuria , and Micrococcus , all of which are common in both environmental and human microbiomes ( 2 – 5 ). Kocuria palustris and Micrococcus luteus are opportunistic pathogens ( 5 , 6 ). M. luteus can survive in a dormant state under extreme oligotrophic conditions ( 7 ) and has increased growth and increased biomass yield in microgravity ( 8 ).

Multiple coagulase-negative staphylococci (CoNS) were also isolated. CoNS are normal components of human skin flora ( 9 ) and are often resistant to antibiotics because of their ability to form biofilms ( 10 ); all CoNS in this report are documented opportunistic pathogens ( 11 – 15 ).

Three species from the phylum Proteobacteria were identified. Acinetobacter pittii is a less common nosocomial pathogen that causes pneumonia and meningitis in intensive care patients ( 16 ), Pseudomonas fulva is a commensal plant endophyte ( 17 ) that can also infect immunocompromised patients ( 18 , 19 ), and Pseudomonas granadensis is a recently discovered soil bacterium ( 20 ).

Two other species in this report that are not associated with the human microbiome are Cytobacillus horneckiae , a Gram-positive UV-resistant endospore-former that was isolated from a clean room at the Kennedy Space Center ( 21 ), and Methylobacterium organophilum , a facultative methylotroph ( 22 ).

All strains reported here were collected aboard the ISS over the course of five flight missions between June 2017 and December 2018 ( Table 1 ). Premoistened polyester wipes were used to collect samples from eight predetermined surfaces during each flight (see Table 1 for locations). After transport to Earth, the wipes were agitated in sterile phosphate-buffered saline, and the buffer was concentrated with an InnovaPrep CP-150 concentrator. Concentrates were plated onto Reasoner’s 2A (R2A) agar (25°C for 7 days), potato dextrose agar (PDA) (25°C for 7 days), and blood agar (37°C for 2 days) using appropriate concentrations for microbial isolation. Isolated colonies were restreaked on tryptic soy agar (TSA) (25°C), and genomic DNA was extracted using the ZymoBIOMICS DNA MagBead kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Libraries for whole-genome shotgun sequencing (WGS) were prepared using the Illumina Nextera DNA Flex library preparation kit as in previous studies ( 23 ) and were sequenced using the NovaSeq 6000 S4 flow cell paired-end 2 × 150-bp platform.

Sequencing reads were quality filtered and trimmed, and adapter sequences were removed, using FastQC v0.11.7 ( 24 ) and fastp v0.20.0 ( 25 ). Scaffolds were assembled with SPAdes v3.11.1 ( 26 ). QUAST v5.0.2 ( 27 ) was used to determine assembly quality, including the number of contigs, genome size, and N 50 value. Default settings were used for all steps except for fastp, which included 512 adapters screening. OrthoANIu ( 28 ) was used to confirm the species identity for each strain against the species type strain sequence, with a minimum average nucleotide identity of 95% for identification. Genomes were annotated using the NCBI Prokaryotic Genome Annotation Pipeline ( 29 ).

The WGS data and raw data have been deposited in GenBank under the BioProject accession number PRJNA690512 . This project has also been deposited in the NASA GeneLab system ( 30 ) under the project number GLDS-361 . The versions described in this paper are the first versions.

Part of the research described was carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory of the California Institute of Technology under a contract with NASA. This research was funded by a 2014 Space Biology NNH14ZTT002N award (grant 80NSSC18K0113) to Crystal Jaing and K.V., which also partially funded postdoctoral fellowships for C.U. and J.M.W. Additionally, A.C.S. was supported by grant 80NM0018D0004, funded to K.V.

We thank astronauts Colonel Jack Fischer, Colonel Mark Vande Hei, Norishige Kanai, and Alexander Gerst for collecting samples aboard the ISS, the implementation team (Fathi Karouia) at NASA Ames Research Center for coordinating this effort, and Crystal Jaing (Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory), principal investigator of the team. We thank Ryan Kemp (Zymo Corp.) for extracting the DNA and Dan Butler (Weill Cornell Medicine) for generating the shotgun sequencing. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory supercomputing facility staff is acknowledged, notably, Narendra J. Patel (Jimmy) and Edward Villanueva, for continuous support in providing the best possible infrastructure for BIG-DATA analysis.

This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.

The WGS data and raw data have been deposited in GenBank under the BioProject accession number PRJNA690512 . This project has also been deposited in the NASA GeneLab system ( 30 ) under the project number GLDS-361 . The versions described in this paper are the first versions.

Articles from Microbiology Resource Announcements are provided here courtesy of American Society for Microbiology (ASM)

Connect with NLM

National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894