Title: Draft Genome Sequences ofBacillaceaeStrains Isolated from the International Space Station
URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7595942/

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.

Primary site navigation

Logged in as:

Address correspondence to Kasthuri Venkateswaran, kjvenkat@jpl.nasa.gov .

Citation Daudu R, Singh NK, Wood JM, Debieu M, O'Hara NB, Mason CE, Venkateswaran K. 2020. Draft genome sequences of Bacillaceae strains isolated from the International Space Station. Microbiol Resour Announc 9:e00701-20. https://doi.org/10.1128/MRA.00701-20 .

Corresponding author.

Received 2020 Jul 6; Accepted 2020 Oct 2; Collection date 2020 Oct.

This is a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.

The draft genome sequences of 29 bacterial isolates belonging to the family Bacillaceae were collected from the International Space Station, assembled, and identified. Further analysis of these sequences will enable us to understand their roles for space and biotechnological applications.

The draft genome sequences of 29 bacterial isolates belonging to the family Bacillaceae were collected from the International Space Station, assembled, and identified. Further analysis of these sequences will enable us to understand their roles for space and biotechnological applications.

The family Bacillaceae is composed of mostly aerobic or facultatively anaerobic rods with a Gram-positive cell wall. Members of this group are ubiquitous in nature, found in soil, sediments, air, freshwater, marine ecosystems, and foods and in extreme environments with high temperatures ( 1 ). Bacillaceae groups are reported to produce a wide range of valuable and thermostable extracellular enzymes ( 2 ). The majority of Bacillaceae can form endospores that are crucial for survival in harsh environments ( 3 , 4 ). This spore-forming property makes it important for NASA planetary protection purposes because spore-forming bacteria are more likely to survive sterilization procedures and the harsh environments of outer space, making them a potential threat for forward contamination ( 5 ).

This report presents the draft genome sequences of three species ( Bacillus amyloliquefaciens , Bacillus cereus , and Paenibacillus polymyxa ) belonging to the family Bacillaceae , isolated from predefined surfaces at various locations on the International Space Station. The samples were collected using premoistened polyester wipes ( 6 ), brought back to Earth, aseptically transferred to a 500-ml bottle containing 200 ml of phosphate-buffered saline, mixed by vigorously shaking, and concentrated via a filtration system. An appropriate aliquot of each sample was inoculated onto either Reasoner’s 2A (R2A) (25°C; 7 days) or blood (37°C; 2 days) agar. A single colony from each incubated plate was used for genomic DNA extraction using the ZymoBIOMICS MagBead DNA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Zymo Research, USA). All isolates were identified by 16S rRNA sequencing based on similarity to their type strain 16S rRNA, as previously reported ( 6 ). To create the whole-genome sequences (WGS) of these strains, shotgun libraries were prepared using the Illumina Nextera Flex protocol ( 7 ), using NovaSeq 6000 S4 flow cell 2 × 150 paired-end (PE) sequencing. Verification of the quality of the raw sequencing data was carried out using FastQC v0.11.7 ( 8 ). Quality control for adapter trimming and quality filtering were performed using fastp v0.20.0 ( 9 ), and then SPAdes v3.11.1 ( 10 ) was used to assemble all the cleaned sequences. Fastp quality control was based on the following three parameters: (i) correction of mismatches in overlapped regions of paired-end reads, (ii) trimming of autodetected adapter sequences, and (iii) quality trimming at the 5′ and 3′ ends. To determine the quality of the assembled sequences, the number of contigs, the N 50 value, and the total length were calculated using QUAST v5.0.2 ( 11 ). Default parameters were used for all software. The average nucleotide identity (ANI) ( 12 ) was calculated using OrthoANIu by comparing each of the 29 Bacillaceae scaffolds to the WGS of the respective type strains. The ANI range was 93.98% to 94.17% for B. amyloliquefaciens , and the ANI was 98% for both B. cereus and P. polymyxa . All other genomic statistics are given in Table 1 .

Summary of draft whole-genome sequences of Bacillaceae strains isolated from various International Space Station environmental surfaces

WHC, waste and hygiene compartment; CRV, commercial resupply vehicle. Hyphenated designations indicate the CRV number followed by the location.

The WGS and raw data have been deposited in GenBank under the BioProject accession number PRJNA637984 and also in the NASA GeneLab system ( https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.gov/genelab/accession/GLDS-303/ ). The version described in this paper is the final version.

Part of the research described in this publication was carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), California Institute of Technology, under a contract with NASA. Government sponsorship is acknowledged. This research was funded by a 2012 Space Biology NNH12ZTT001N grant (no. 19-12829-26) under task order NNN13D111T award to K.V., which also funded a postdoctoral fellowship for J.M.W., a JPL graduate fellowship to R.D., and a subcontract to Biotia, Inc.

We thank astronaut Terry Virts for collecting samples aboard the International Space Station (ISS) and the Implementation Team (Fathi Karouia) at NASA Ames Research Center for coordinating this effort. We thank Ryan Kemp (Zymo Corporation) for DNA extraction and Dan Butler (Cornell Medicine) for generating the shotgun sequencing using NovaSeq. R.D. thanks Wei-Jen Lin for providing guidance and direction regarding undertaking research at JPL.

This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.

The WGS and raw data have been deposited in GenBank under the BioProject accession number PRJNA637984 and also in the NASA GeneLab system ( https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.gov/genelab/accession/GLDS-303/ ). The version described in this paper is the final version.

Articles from Microbiology Resource Announcements are provided here courtesy of American Society for Microbiology (ASM)

Connect with NLM

National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894