Title: Ethylene-Induced Flavonol Accumulation in Guard Cells Suppresses Reactive
Oxygen Species and Moderates Stomatal Aperture1,[W],[OPEN]
URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3982735/

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.

Primary site navigation

Logged in as:

www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/doi/10.1104/pp.113.233528

Address correspondence to muday@wfu.edu .

The author responsible for distribution of materials integral to the findings
presented in this article in accordance with the policy described in the
Instructions for Authors ( http://www.plantphysiol.org ) is: Gloria K. Muday
( muday@wfu.edu ).

Focus on Water

Received 2013 Dec 4; Accepted 2014 Mar 2; Issue date 2014 Apr.

In the epidermis of Arabidopsis leaves, flavonols specifically accumulate in
guard cells with enhanced synthesis in the presence of ethylene, where they lower
the levels of reactive oxygen species and reduce the rate of stomatal
closure .

Guard cell swelling controls the aperture of stomata, pores that facilitate gas
exchange and water loss from leaves. The hormone abscisic acid ( ABA ) has a central role in regulation of stomatal closure
through synthesis of second messengers, which include reactive oxygen species ( ROS ). ROS accumulation must be minimized by antioxidants to keep concentrations
from reaching damaging levels within the cell. Flavonols are plant metabolites that
have been implicated as antioxidants; however, their antioxidant activity in planta
has been debated. Flavonols accumulate in guard cells of Arabidopsis
thaliana, but not surrounding pavement cells, as visualized with a
flavonol-specific dye. The expression of a reporter driven by the promoter of CHALCONE SYNTHASE , a gene encoding a flavonol biosynthetic
enzyme, in guard cells, but not pavement cells, suggests guard cell-specific
flavonoid synthesis. Increased levels of ROS were detected using a fluorescent ROS sensor
in guard cells of transparent testa4-2 , which has a null mutation in CHALCONE SYNTHASE and therefore synthesizes no flavonol
antioxidants. Guard cells of transparent testa4-2 show more rapid ABA -induced closure than the wild type,
suggesting that flavonols may dampen the ABA -dependent ROS burst that drives
stomatal closing. The levels of flavonols are positively regulated in guard cells by
ethylene treatment in the wild type, but not in the ethylene-insensitive2-5 mutant. In addition, in both ethylene-overproducing1 and ethylene-treated wild-type plants,
elevated flavonols lead to decreasing ROS and
slower ABA -mediated stomatal closure. These
results are consistent with flavonols suppressing ROS accumulation and decreasing the rate of ABA -dependent stomatal closure, with ethylene-induced increases
in guard cell flavonols modulating these responses.

Guard cells use an extensive signal transduction pathway to regulate the aperture of
stomata, pores on the surface of leaves that facilitate gas exchange and water loss ( Roelfsema and Hedrich, 2005 ; Joshi-Saha et al., 2011 ). CO 2 , a necessary reactant for
photosynthesis, enters leaves through stomata, whereas water can leave through these same
pores via transpiration. Excess water loss can lead to dehydration of the plant when there
is excess heat or drought. Guard cells therefore must modulate the stomatal aperture in
response to the changing environment ( Hirayama and
Shinozaki, 2007 ). In response to stimuli that close stomata, such as drought
stress, the hormone abscisic acid ( ABA ) is
increased in the cytosol of guard cells ( Zeevaart,
1980 ; Hirayama and Shinozaki (2007) ). ABA induces ion movements across the cell
membrane expelling K + and Cl − ions through ion efflux
channels. The decreased internal solute concentration drives water out of the cell via
osmosis ( Vahisalu et al., 2008 ). The loss of water
from guard cells decreases the volume of the cell, with the resulting loss of turgor
closing the stoma ( Joshi-Saha et al., 2011 ).
Additional understanding of this elegant signaling pathway will provide insight into how
plant growth and development is modulated by changes in soil moisture, temperature, and
light levels.

Reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) are one important
class of signaling molecules that has been implicated in guard cell signaling ( Guan et al., 2000 ; Zhang et al., 2001 ; Jiang and Zhang,
2002 , 2003 ). The well-documented role of ROS in causing oxidative stress is now joined
with growing evidence that ROS may play integral
roles as secondary messengers in signal transduction pathways ( Wood et al., 2003 ; Rhee,
2006 ; Mittler et al., 2011 ; Munné-Bosch et al., 2013 ). At high
concentrations, ROS , such as hydrogen peroxide
( H 2 O 2 ), can cause
oxidative damage to DNA and proteins that are integral to normal cellular processes ( Asada, 2006 ; Van
Breusegem and Dat, 2006 ); however, at low levels, H 2 O 2 is an effective signaling molecule in guard
cells that can induce stomatal closure ( Pei et al.,
2000 ; Murata et al., 2001 ; Zhang et al., 2001 ; Kwak et al., 2003 ). Elevated ABA in
guard cells triggers H 2 O 2 production through activation of NADPH or respiratory burst oxidase enzymes located on the
plasma membrane ( Mustilli et al., 2002 ; Yoshida et al., 2002 ) and mutants in Arabidopsis thaliana respiratory burst oxidase D ( AtrbohD ) and AtrbohF , show impaired ABA -regulated stomatal closure ( Kwak et al., 2003 ).

The ability of signaling-regulated synthesis of H 2 O 2 to alter the activity of specific target proteins
has been shown in mammalian systems ( Rhee, 2006 ).
This oxidant, generated from superoxide O 2 .− molecules, can
modulate the activity of phosphatases and kinases, causing dynamic changes in signal
transduction pathways ( Poole et al., 2004 ).
Specifically, H 2 O 2 can
interact with specific Cys residues, transforming the functional group of the Cys into
sulfenic acid, altering formation of disulfide bonds between two separate proteins or
between nearby Cys residues of the same protein, in a transient, reversible fashion ( Poole et al., 2004 ; Poole and Nelson, 2008 ). In guard cells, this ROS burst is believed to target calcium channels to promote the influx of
calcium across the plasma membrane and the release of calcium from internal stores ( McAinsh et al., 1996 ; Allen et al., 2000 ; Cho et al.,
2009 ). Increased cytosolic calcium levels induce activation of anion efflux
channels located on the plasma membrane ( Hedrich et al.,
1990 ; Schroeder and Hagiwara, 1990 ; Chen et al., 2010 ; Wang et al., 2013 ), triggering stomatal closure. The mechanism behind ROS activation of Ca 2+ channels in
mammalian systems has been well studied ( Poole and
Nelson, 2008 ); however, less is known about this mechanism in plants.

When maintained at manageable levels, ROS are
efficient and reversible signaling molecules employed by cells to regulate the activity of
enzymes and transcription factors; however, if levels of these molecules become excessively
elevated, they can cause oxidative stress ( Hernández et al., 2009 ; Pollastri and
Tattini, 2011 ). Therefore, mechanisms that keep their levels from becoming too
high and allow their accumulation to be transient are important features of ROS signaling. ROS homeostasis is tightly regulated in plants through the production of a
variety of enzymatic and small molecule antioxidants ( Mittler et al., 2004 ). Flavonols are plant metabolites that may function as
antioxidants in plants and in animals that consume them ( Hernández et al., 2009 ). Although their antioxidant activity in planta
has been debated, previous studies have shown that the antioxidant capacity for flavonols
in vitro is greater than that of vitamin C or E, two well-documented in planta antioxidants
( Rice-Evans et al., 1997 ). Guard cells provide
an elegant system to test the antioxidant ability of flavonols, owing to the
well-documented function of ROS as a second
messenger in this cell type ( Pei et al., 2000 ; Murata et al., 2001 ; Kwak et al., 2003 ; Cho et al.,
2009 ).

This study examined the accumulation of flavonols in guard cells and the role of flavonol
accumulation in controlling the levels of ROS . A
flavonol-specific dye and a reporter construct driven by a promoter from a gene encoding a
flavonol biosynthetic enzyme revealed the localized accumulation of flavonols and the
expression of this gene that drives their synthesis in guard cells, but not in surrounding
pavement cells. Mutants that make no flavonols are used to demonstrate the specificity of
the flavonol-specific dye, and to show the effect of flavonols on ROS status and stomatal aperture. Finally, the induction of flavonol
synthesis in guard cells in response to ethylene was examined, as well as the effect of
these regulated changes in flavonol concentration on stomatal aperture. These results
indicate that flavonols suppress ROS levels within
guard cell modulating stomatal aperture and with changing environmental conditions
modulating flavonol synthesis and guard cell signaling.

To determine whether flavonols accumulate in guard cells, we used diphenylboric acid
2-aminoethyl ester ( DPBA ) dye to detect
flavonols. The specificity of DPBA fluorescence was demonstrated in Arabidopsis ( Arabidopsis thaliana )
roots using mutants in flavonol synthesis, with no signal observed in the transparent testa4-2 ( tt4-2 ) mutant that makes
no flavonoids ( Lewis et al., 2011 ) because
of a mutation in the gene that encodes chalcone synthase ( CHS ), the first step in the flavonoid biosynthesis pathway. The DPBA fluorescence of the surface of an
Arabidopsis leaf, with and without a differential interference contrast ( DIC ) overlay of pavement cells, illustrated
localized accumulation of flavonols in guard cells with no signal in surrounding
pavement cells ( Fig. 1, A and B ). This pattern
was observed in more than 50 leaves. We also asked whether the flavonol localization
was restricted to guard cells as a result of flavonol biosynthesis in those cells.
Epidermal leaf peels of transgenic plants with a CHS promoter
driving a GUS reporter were visualized by bright-field microscopy. GUS product
accumulated in the epidermal guard cells ( Fig.
1C ), with no GUS product accumulation in surrounding pavement cells. This
reporter is expressed in additional cell layers in cross sections of whole leaves
( Chory and Peto, 1990 ). These results
were consistent with tissue-specific signals, including transcriptional controls of
flavonol synthesis, restricting flavonol accumulation to guard cells.



Flavonols accumulate in guard cells. A, Confocal micrograph showed yellow DPBA fluorescence in guard cells, but not
pavement cells. B, DIC image overlaid
on a confocal micrograph of wild-type leaves showing the location of yellow DPBA fluorescence. C, Bright-field
image shows CHS : GUS expression in guard
cells, but not pavement cells of wild-type plants. Bar = 15 μm.

To more quantitatively and precisely image DPBA in leaf tissue, we optimized laser scanning confocal microscope
( LSCM ) settings in order to spectrally
separate total flavonol fluorescence from chlorophyll autofluorescence. Using the
basal surface of a whole Arabidopsis leaf, confocal micrographs showed
autofluorescence of chlorophyll in the blue channel and DPBA staining in the yellow channel ( Fig. 2 ). The absence of the DPBA signal in tt4-2 guard cells confirmed the
specificity of this staining in leaf tissues, complementing the previous studies in
roots ( Buer and Muday, 2004 ; Lewis et al., 2011 ). This image indicated that
we can resolve these two fluorescent signals and that flavonols accumulated in the
cytosol, but not the chloroplasts of guard cells. It was also evident that DPBA fluorescence was greater in the regions of
the guard cell that appeared to be nuclei, a cellular location that exhibited
flavonoid accumulation in other plant cells types ( Feucht et al., 2004 ; Saslowsky et al.,
2005 ; Lewis et al., 2011 ).
Verification of nuclear flavonol accumulation was completed by simultaneously imaging DPBA and Hoechst 33258, a nucleic acid
stain ( Supplemental Fig. S1 ). After imaging DPBA with spectral separation, we imaged the same guard cells using
single-channel microscopy to visualize Hoechst fluorescence and consistently observed
that the region of bright DPBA staining in
the center of each guard cell also had nucleic acids, as detected by Hoechst,
consistent with a nuclear accumulation of flavonols.



Flavonol accumulation is absent in tt4 guard cells and
enhanced in eto1 guard cells. DPBA bound to flavonols is shown in yellow and chlorophyll
autofluorescence is shown in blue. Bar = 15 μm.

The levels of DPBA fluorescence in the
cytosol and nucleus of the wild type and tt4-2 were quantified in 90
guard cells and are reported relative to the levels in the cytosol of ecotype
Columbia 0 of Arabidopsis ( Col-0 ; Fig. 3A ). DPBA fluorescence was at background levels in tt4-2 ,
whereas wild-type plants had a robust DPBA fluorescent signal, with approximately 2-fold higher intensity in the nucleus than in
the cytosol.



A, Subcellular flavonol accumulation in wild-type guard cells compared with eto1 and tt4 . Flavonol accumulation was
measured using guard cell DPBA fluorescence intensity values and the average ± se is reported
relative to the levels in the cytosol of Col-0 for n = 90 stomata. Asterisks indicate
significant differences ( P < 0.005) between the mutant and
the wild type within cellular location. Number signs indicate significant
differences ( P < 0.02) between cytosol and nucleus within
genotype. B, LC-MS analysis of flavonol
levels in whole leaves showed enhanced accumulation of quercetin and kaempferol
in eto1 leaves compared with the control ( P < 0.003 and P < 0.06, respectively). No flavonols were
detected in tt4 . Data represent results from three separate
experiments each with n = 6. ND, Not detected because compound
is either absent or below the level of threshold detection.

To analyze the functional significance of flavonol accumulation in guard cells, we
compared ABA -dependent stomatal closure in
wild-type and tt4-2 guard cells. Because ABA triggers a ROS burst
in guard cells and flavonols reduce ROS concentrations, we expected flavonol concentrations in guard cells to be inversely
proportional to the rates of ABA -induced
stomatal closure. Leaves were excised and incubated with 20 μ m ABA for 0, 45, 90, or 180 min. At the
indicated times after treatment, epidermal peels were generated and DIC images were captured and used for
measurement of stomatal aperture. Apertures were quantified in 30 stomata for three
separate experiments ( Fig. 4 ). Although tt4 and the wild type showed similar aperture in opening
solution, the initial ABA -induced stomatal
closure response was greater in tt4 guard cells than the control,
with all aperture values significantly different than the wild type
( P < 0.05). The apertures of stomata were also quantified in
the absence of ABA under identical conditions
over the same time course in these two genotypes. The guard cells remained open under
these conditions and there were no detectable differences between the wild type and tt4-2 ( Supplemental Fig. S2 ). We also examined the effect of 3 h of ABA treatment on DPBA fluorescence in guard cells, mirroring the time course of ABA in the stomatal closure assays to ask
if ABA altered flavonol synthesis. The DPBA signal was not altered by ABA during this 3-h treatment ( Supplemental Fig. S3 ). These results were consistent with the absence
of an antioxidant in tt4-2 guard cells that leads to an increase in
signaling via ROS .



Stomatal aperture of Col-0 and tt4 in response to ABA . ABA sensitivity is
indirectly proportional to relative flavonol concentration. Guard cells were
incubated under white light in a 20-μM ABA solution for 0, 45, 90, and 180 min. The average ± se of 90 stomata from three biological replicates are reported.
Asterisks indicate significant differences ( P < 0.05)
between the mutant and Col-0 at each
time point as determined by the Student’s t test.

Because elevated ethylene levels were previously shown to increase flavonol
accumulation in Arabidopsis roots ( Lewis et al.,
2011 ), we asked whether there is similar regulation in guard cells. DPBA fluorescence was examined in the ethylene-overproducing1 ( eto1 ) mutant ( Chae et al., 2003 ) and enhanced flavonol
accumulation was observed in the guard cells ( Fig.
2 ). The DPBA fluorescence intensity
was quantified in 90 stomata and average fluorescence is reported relative to the
values in the cytosol of Col-0 ( Fig. 3 ). There is a >1.6-fold increase in DPBA fluorescence in the cytosol and a
>1.5-fold increase in the nuclei of eto1 guard cells compared
with the wild type ( Fig. 3 ; P < 0.001).

To further examine the effect of ethylene on flavonol synthesis in guard cells, we
treated plants with exogenous ethylene. The wild type and the ethylene-insensitive2-5 ( ein2-5 ) mutant, an
ethylene signaling mutant with nearly complete ethylene insensitivity ( Alonso et al., 1999 ), were treated with 5
μL/L ethylene gas for 24 h, and then DPBA fluorescence in the guard cells was imaged ( Fig. 5 ). The DPBA fluorescence was quantified in both the nucleus and cytosol, as described above, for
30 stomata per treatment in three separate experiments, and the average signal
relative to the signal in the cytosol of untreated Col-0 was calculated ( Fig. 5 ).
Similar to eto1, the guard cells of ethylene-treated wild-type
plants had enhanced DPBA fluorescence in the
cytosol and nuclei compared with an untreated control ( P < 0.01).
A similar magnitude increase in DPBA fluorescence was also evident after 3 h of ethylene treatment, as shown in Supplemental Figure S3A . Guard cells of ein2-5 had
significantly lower DPBA fluorescence than Col-0 in both the cytosol and nucleus in
the absence of treatment ( P < 0.02) and showed no increase in DPBA fluorescence after ethylene treatment
( Fig. 5 ).



Subcellular flavonol accumulation in Col-0 and ein2-5 guard cells with and without
ethylene treatment. Intact soil grown plants were incubated in ethylene gas at
5 μL/L concentration for 24 h. DPBA fluorescence intensity values were quantified and are reported
relative to the untreated Col-0 cytosol
fluorescence intensity. Asterisks indicate significant differences
( P < 0.02) between the mutant and the wild type within
treatment. Number signs indicate significant differences between treated and
untreated controls within a genotype as determined by the Student’s t test ( P < 0.02). The average ± se of 90 stomata from three biological replicates are reported.

We employed HPLC together with mass spectroscopy ( LC-MS ) to directly quantify concentrations of kaempferol and quercetin in
whole leaves to examine the effect of elevated ethylene levels on flavonol
concentration. Hydrolyzed flavonol samples extracted from 18 leaves of 4-week-old Col-0 , tt4-2, and eto1 plants were analyzed to examine the total flavonol pools of
each compound. The concentrations of flavonols were detected in three separate
experiments, with a representative graph shown in Figure 3 . Flavonol extractions from whole leaves showed 1.3- and 5-fold
increased levels of accumulation of kaempferol and quercetin, respectively, in eto1 compared with the wild type. This experimental approach
could not demonstrate that ethylene-dependent increases in flavonols were localized
specifically to guard cells, but it did illustrate that the increases in total
flavonol concentrations mirror the fluorescence increases in guard cells observed
with DPBA staining.

The concentrations of ROS are highly
regulated in guard cells and are an essential feature of rapid stomatal closure in
response to ABA ( Pei et al., 2000 ; Kwak et
al., 2003 ). ROS concentration
within guard cells was examined to determine whether flavonols are acting as
antioxidants in vivo. To visualize ROS accumulation in Arabidopsis leaf tissue, we used 2',7'
dihydrodichlorofluorescein diacetate ( H2DCF-DA ), a general ROS fluorescent sensor ( Halliwell and Whiteman,
2004 ). In the past, this fluorescent probe has been imaged with UV light to
visualize ROS in guard cells ( Kwak et al., 2003 ); however, we excited with a
488-nm laser, a wavelength that is more frequently used when imaging this probe
( Halliwell and Whiteman, 2004 ). H2DCF-DA is taken up by cells, in which
internal cellular esterases cleave off the diacetate functional group, preventing
2',7'-dichlorofluorescein (DCF) from diffusing outside of the cell.
Upon oxidation by ROS , DCF becomes
fluorescent. To minimize any dye uptake difference or light-induced fluorescence
increases that can occur with this dye ( Murata et
al., 2001 ), all incubation and imaging times and settings were carefully
maintained within each experimental comparison.

We used spectral separation through confocal microscopy to separate out chlorophyll
autofluorescence from DCF fluorescence in guard cells in epidermal leaf peels of the
wild type, tt4-2 , and eto1 ( Fig. 6 ). In all three genotypes, DCF fluorescence was at very
low levels in pavement cells, but accumulated in guard cells in both nuclei and the
cytosol, with greater fluorescence in the nuclei, mirroring the tissue and
subcellular accumulation of flavonols. The levels of DCF fluorescence in the cytosol
and nucleus of the wild type, tt4 , and eto1 were
quantified in 90 guard cells and values were normalized relative to the levels in the
cytosol of Col-0 ( Fig. 6B ). In the tt4 mutant, which does not
synthesize flavonols, DCF fluorescence intensity was greater in both the cytosol and
the nucleus of guard cells compared with the wild type. Quantification of DCF
fluorescence indicated that there is a 2- and 2.5-fold increase in tt4-2 in the cytosol and nucleus, respectively, compared with
wild-type guard cells.



A, Confocal micrographs of H2DCF-DA -stained guard cells of 4-week-old Col-0 , tt4 , and eto1 plants. DCF fluorescence is shown in green, and chlorophyll autofluorescence is
shown in blue in separate channels and merged images captured under identical
confocal settings. B, Quantification of subcellular DCF fluorescence in guard
cells. Leaf peels of 3- to 4-week-old plants were stained with 2.5 μM H2DCF-DA for 30 min and imaged
using confocal microscopy. DCF intensity values in the cytosol and nucleus of
guard cells were determined and are reported relative to the levels in the
cytosol of Col-0 . The average ± se of 90 stomata from three biological replicates are reported. C,
Quantification of subcellular DCF fluorescence in guard cells. Data from two
experiments are combined and the average ± se of 60 stomata are
reported. Asterisks indicate significant differences ( P <
0.005) between the mutant and the wild type within treatment. Number signs
indicate significant differences ( P < 0.05) between treated
and untreated controls within a genotype as determined by the Student’s t test. Bar = 15 µm.

There were also lower levels of DCF fluorescence in eto1 than in the
wild type with reduction to 60% of the values in the untreated wild type, consistent
with the higher levels of antioxidants in the presence of elevated ethylene. Ethylene
treatment for 24 h showed decreased ROS accumulation in the wild type ( Fig. 6 ), with
similar ROS decreases observed after 3 h of
ethylene treatment compared with untreated controls ( Supplemental Fig, S2B ). In tt4 , there were increased
levels of ROS detected at 24 h, but not after
3 h of ethylene treatment compared with untreated tt4 ( Fig. 6 ). The 24-h ethylene treatment results
mirrored a previous report that ethylene induced ROS accumulation in guard cells through activation of NADPH oxidase
AtRBOHF ( Desikan et al., 2006 ). Together
these images suggested an antioxidant activity of flavonols in guard cells, by
illustrating an inverse relationship between flavonol concentration and ROS levels using both mutants to block flavonol
synthesis and treatments and mutants to elevate ethylene levels and flavonol
accumulation.

The effect of 24 h of ethylene treatment of the wild type and tt4 and in the untreated eto1 mutant was examined using the same
above-described stomatal closure assay. The closure at time 0, 45, and 90 min after ABA treatment for 90 stomata from three
experiments were quantified in these three genotypes ( Fig. 7 ). After incubation in the opening solution for 3 h, all stomata
were equivalently open and in the absence of added ABA , remained equivalently open ( Supplemental Fig. S2 ). Ethylene-treated wild-type and eto1 guard cells showed decreased closure in response to ABA , whereas untreated tt4 shows the most stomatal closure at each time point. When wild-type plants were
treated with ethylene for 3 h ( Supplemental Fig. S3C ), similar results were observed. We expected
that tt4 would show no response to ethylene treatment, if the only
effect of ethylene is on flavonoid synthesis; however, we found that it does show a
reduced stomatal closure in the presence of 24 h of ethylene treatment, but not 3 h.
The stomatal aperture is still smaller in tt4-2 with ethylene
treatment than in Col-0 with ethylene, consistent with a role for ethylene-mediated
flavonol synthesis in reducing the rate of stomatal closure through modulation of ROS signals. The difference in stomatal
aperture in tt4 in the absence and presence of 24 h of ethylene
treatment suggests the presence of a separate flavonol-independent pathway by which
ethylene treatment facilitates stomatal closure. The absence of this effect at 3 h
suggests that this may well be a secondary effect of extended ethylene
treatments.



Stomatal aperture widths in response to ABA . ABA sensitivity is
indirectly proportional to relative flavonol concentration. Guard cells were
incubated under white light in a 20-μM ABA solution for 0, 45, and 90 min. The average ± se of 90 stomata from three biological replicates are reported. Asterisks indicate
significant differences between samples and untreated Col-0 using a Student’s t test
( P < 0.05).

Guard cells control the aperture of stomatal pores in response to environmental
fluctuations, including variations in light intensity, moisture, and carbon dioxide
levels ( Hetherington and Woodward, 2003 ). In
response to environmental stress, the plant hormone ABA signals stomatal closure ( Zeevaart,
1980 ; Hirayama and Shinozaki, 2007 ; Cho et al., 2009 ; Joshi-Saha et al., 2011 ). This signaling pathway employs H 2 O 2 as a ROS second messenger ( McAinsh et al., 1996 ; Murata et
al., 2001 ; Zhang et al., 2001 ; Kwak et al., 2003 ). During signaling of stomatal
closure, ROS must reach a certain threshold to
oxidize their targets ( Kwak et al., 2003 ; Cho et al., 2009 ), but must not reach levels that
will cause oxidative damage ( Munné-Bosch et
al., 2013 ). To prevent oxidative damage, ROS signaling must be tightly regulated by small molecule and/or protein
antioxidants ( Conklin et al., 1996 ; Apel and Hirt, 2004 ), with antioxidants including
glutathione and flavonoids. Recent reports demonstrated the altered redox state and
altered stomatal aperture in mutants defective in glutathione synthesis ( Okuma et al., 2011 ; Munemasa et al., 2013 ). In this study, we tested the hypothesis
that flavonols act as antioxidants that reduce ROS concentrations in guard cells, thus modulating stomatal closure.

We examined where and how flavonols accumulated in the epidermal layers of leaves in
order to better understand their role in cell signaling. Flavonol accumulation was
visualized through confocal microscopy, using a flavonol-specific fluorescent dye, DPBA . In the wild type, DPBA fluorescence was localized to guard cells but was absent in
surrounding pavement cells, whereas it was not detected in any cell types in the
flavonoid-deficient tt4-2 mutant. Localized flavonol accumulation in
guard cells could be a result of localized synthesis or selective import of these
molecules into the cells. To examine whether flavonol biosynthetic enzymes are
synthesized in guard cells in planta, a CHS : GUS transgenic line was utilized. CHS promoter-driven GUS product
accumulated specifically in guard cells and not in surrounding epidermal pavement cells,
which suggests that production of CHS , a key
flavonol biosynthesis enzyme, is localized to Arabidopsis guard cells. This result is
consistent with previous research that shows the presence of transcripts encoding
enzymes of flavonol biosynthesis in guard cell protoplasts, including chalcone
isomerase, flavanone 3-hydroxylase, flavonol synthase1, and flavonoid
3′hydroxylase ( Pandey et al., 2010 ).
This result extends previous study in two ways. First, it minimized the damage to cells
that is the result of creating protoplasts, which may increase the expression of
flavonoid biosynthesis genes in cells where they are not normally produced ( Dixon and Paiva, 1995 ; Winkel-Shirley, 2002 ). Second, the available microarray data do
not have a pavement cell transcriptome for comparison ( Pandey et al., 2010 ). Using very different experimental methods in Vicia faba , flavonols were previously reported to accumulate in
guard cells and surrounding epidermal cells ( Schnabl
et al., 1986 ; Takahama, 1988 ). Both
reports used spectrophotometric imaging of epidermal peels, which limits the resolution
of flavonols accumulation in individual cells. Using the highly localized accumulation
of DPBA fluorescence, our results demonstrate
that there is a guard cell-specific flavonol accumulation profile in Arabidopsis.

Because flavonols accumulate specifically in guard cells, we asked whether these
molecules function as antioxidants to reduce ROS concentrations. Flavonols have been shown to have antioxidant activity in vitro;
however, their antioxidant activity in planta has been debated ( Rice-Evans et al., 1997 ; Hernández et al., 2009 ; Pollastri
and Tattini, 2011 ). Because ROS has
been implicated as a second messenger in guard cell signaling ( McAinsh et al., 1996 ; Murata et
al., 2001 ; Zhang et al., 2001 ; Kwak et al., 2003 ), we asked whether the presence
of flavonols affected the ROS accumulation in
guard cells. To visualize ROS accumulation, we
used DCFH-DA , a general ROS sensor, and utilized spectral separation to remove chlorophyll
autofluorescence. DCF fluorescence was localized to guard cells, similar to the DPBA fluorescence pattern, indicating that both
flavonols and ROS accumulate specifically in
this cell type, but not in surrounding pavement cells. In addition, we saw increased DCF
fluorescence in tt4-2 mutants that synthesize no flavonols, consistent
with the absence of flavonols resulting in increased ROS concentrations, which is also consistent with an antioxidant activity for
flavonols in vitro.

DPBA fluorescence were at higher levels in the
nuclei than the cytosol in all genotypes and treatments. This observation is consistent
with characteristics of other plant species that showed flavonoid and ROS accumulation in the nuclei ( Feucht et al., 2004 ; Mazars et al., 2010 ; Lewis et
al., 2011 ). Immunolocalization with antibodies against CHS and chalcone isomerase suggests that the enzymes of flavonoid
synthesis are localized to the nucleus in Arabidopsis roots ( Saslowsky et al., 2005 ). The nuclear localization of flavonols is
consistent with the notion that ROS can regulate
gene expression through interaction with redox-sensitive transcription factors ( TF s) in plants ( Wu et al., 2012 ), such as the well-established redox-sensitive TF described in bacteria and mammals ( Aslund et al., 1999 ; Biswas et al., 2006 ). Flavonols are a likely candidate to modulate
the activity of redox-sensitive TF s, because of
their increased accumulation in the nuclei; however, it is unlikely that they are the
only antioxidant present in this organelle. Flavonols have been shown to chelate metal
ions, such as Fe 3+ , which catalyze the production of hydroxyl radicals from H 2 O 2 ( Hernández et al., 2009 ). Thus, flavonol
accumulation in the nucleus would contribute to a decreased redox potential in the
nucleus, potentially decreasing the number of TF oxidation events. Combined with our data suggesting an in planta
antioxidant ability of flavonols, we hypothesize that flavonol accumulation in the
nuclei may modulate the activity of redox-sensitive TF s that affect gene expression in addition to preventing oxidative damage to
DNA, although the time scale of transcriptional effects may be beyond the rapid
regulation of guard cell aperture.

Because stomatal apertures are environmentally regulated, we hypothesized that
regulation of flavonol synthesis may be a way for plants to modulate the physiology of
guard cells. Previous studies have shown that ethylene increases flavonol accumulation
in Arabidopsis roots ( Buer et al., 2007 ; Lewis et al., 2011 ), and we asked whether this
hormone may also increase flavonol accumulation in guard cells. Elevated levels of
ethylene through endogenous overproduction in the eto1 mutant and
exogenous application of ethylene to wild-type leaves increased flavonol accumulation in
this cell type, as visualized by localized DPBA fluorescence. We observed robust increases in DPBA fluorescence at both 3 and 24 h after treatment with ethylene gas. This
ethylene-enhanced flavonol accumulation pattern requires a functional ethylene signaling
pathway, because the ethylene-induced DPBA fluorescence increases were lost in the ein2 mutant. A previous study
showed that ethylene-induced flavonoid increases detected by DPBA can also be detected by LC-MS ( Lewis et al., 2011 ). We
therefore verified these flavonols increases in leaves using LC-MS and detected approximately 5-fold increases in quercetin and
a smaller, but still statistically significant, increase in kaempferol in whole leaves
treated with ethylene under similar conditions.

We also observed decreased DCF fluorescence in the wild type and tt4 treated with ethylene for 3 or 24 h as well as in eto1 guard cells
compared with the wild type, suggesting that the increase in flavonols decreases ROS concentrations. In addition, ethylene-treated
wild-type guard cells and eto1 exhibited a decreased rate of ABA -induced stomatal closure, a result that is
consistent with flavonols acting as antioxidants reducing the H 2 O 2 burst that drives stomatal closure.

Ethylene has been shown to promote both stomatal closure in Arachis
hypogaea and Arabidopsis ( Pallas and Kays,
1982 ; Desikan et al., 2006 ) and
stomatal opening in Dianthus caryophyllus , Solanum
lycopersicum , V. faba, and Arabidopsis ( Madhavan et al., 1983 ; Levitt et al., 1987 ; Tanaka et
al., 2005 ). Applied ethylene gas or its precursor,
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid, was shown to induce stomatal closure through
elevated ROS production generated by AtRBOHF, an
NADPH oxidase ( Desikan et al., 2006 ). In our
study, a previously reported ROS burst that was
observed upon ethylene treatment of wild-type guard cells ( Desikan et al., 2006 ) was masked by increased flavonol
accumulation, but we observed that a 24-h ethylene treatment of tt4 led
to elevated ROS (although this increase was not
detected after 3 h of treatment), consistent with the absence of antioxidants. Other
researchers report that treatment of wild-type plants with ethylene or
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid or endogenous ethylene overproduction in eto1 inhibit stomatal closure in the presence of ABA in Arabidopsis ( Tanaka et al., 2005 ) and in wheat ( Triticum
durum ; Chen et al., 2013 ). These
findings are mirrored in our results, with decreased ROS and stomatal closure in response to ethylene treatment or the eto1 mutation. We predicted that ethylene-treated tt4 might be insensitive to the effect of ethylene on stomatal
aperture, because there will be no change in flavonoid antioxidants. We found that in
both the wild type and tt4 , ethylene reduced the rate of stomatal
closure, consistent with a flavonoid- and ROS -independent ethylene regulation of this process, although the tt4 mutant has a greater rate in both cases consistent with a second ROS -dependent mechanism. A ROS -independent pathway for ABA -induced stomatal closure was previously suggested ( Kwak et al., 2003 ). ABA treatment of atrbohD/F double mutant guard
cells resulted in no change in ROS concentrations, although cytosolic Ca 2+ elevations were observed in nearly
one-half of all guard cells ( Kwak et al.,
2003 ). We hypothesize that a 24-h ethylene treatment may inhibit ROS -independent stomatal closure in the absence of
flavonols, which would explain the delayed closure that is observed in ethylene-treated tt4 . Our results suggest that ethylene induces flavonol
accumulation, which reduces both the concentration of ROS and the rate of ABA -induced
stomatal closure.

We have constructed a model to synthesize these data, which is shown in Figure 8 . This model outlines the ABA signaling pathway in which ABA activates respiratory burst oxidases increasing
the levels of ROS , which act as signaling
molecules to induce stomatal closure. Flavonoids act as antioxidants reducing the levels
of ROS , which decrease the rate of stomatal
closure. Elevated levels of ethylene, both through elevated synthesis in eto1 or by treatment with exogenous ethylene, increase flavonol
accumulation and decrease ROS , resulting in a
reduced rate of stomatal closure. When a flavonoid-deficient mutant is treated with
ethylene, we find that ROS levels increase after
24 h of treatment, but not after 3 h of treatment. These findings suggest that extended
ethylene elevated ROS accumulation ( Fig. 8 , dotted line), but that the elevated ethylene
after ROS treatment in the wild type more than
compensates by increasing levels of flavonol antioxidants. We predicted that tt4 would be insensitive to the effect of ethylene on stomatal
closure, whereas we found that this treatment leads to a reduced rate of closure, which
is evident at 24 h, but not 3 h of ethylene treatment ( Fig. 8 , dotted line). We hypothesize that ethylene may enhance the synthesis
of a second signaling molecule that may act to alter stomatal closure through a separate
mechanism in the presence of extended ethylene treatment. Yet the absence of ethylene
effects on ROS and stomatal aperture after 3-h
treatments suggests that the primary effects of ethylene are on synthesis of flavonol
antioxidants that suppress ROS levels.



A proposed model of the effects of ethylene and flavonols on stomatal closure. ABA is released into the cytosol where
it triggers respiratory burst oxidases, which induce a burst of ROS , which act as secondary messengers to
signal stomatal closure. Ethylene induces flavonols accumulation in guard cells
through EIN2. Flavonols act as antioxidants to scavenge ROS and thereby inhibits stomatal closure. In the absence of
flavonols, ethylene induced ROS accumulation after 24 h, but not after 3 h of treatment. Similarly, 24 h of
ethylene treatment affected stomatal aperture in tt4 , whereas 3 h
of ethylene treatment did not. The effects of ethylene observed at 24 h are
indicated with dashed lines. Arrows represent positive effects and bars represent
negative effects.

Guard cell function is integral to plant adaptation to a changing environment. Much is
known about the role of ROS as a second
messenger in this cell type ( Wang and Song,
2008 ); however, the role of antioxidants in guard cells to modulate ROS concentrations has not been well studied. We
observed flavonol and ROS accumulation in guard
cells and showed that the concentrations of flavonols in planta are inversely
proportional to ROS levels, consistent with in
vitro studies of flavonols acting as antioxidants ( Rice-Evans et al., 1997 ; Hernández
et al., 2009 ). This study showed that flavonol levels are ethylene regulated
in guard cells. Elevated levels of ethylene in response to exogenous treatment of the
wild type and endogenous synthesis in the eto1 mutant increase flavonol
accumulation in guard cells, resulting in decreased ROS levels and decreased rate of stomatal closure. Together these results
indicate that flavonols suppress ROS levels in
guard cells and thereby modulate the dynamics of stomatal aperture.

Arabidopsis ( Arabidopsis thaliana ) plants were germinated on
1× Murashige and Skoog medium, pH 5.6, Murashige and Skoog vitamins, and 0.8%
(w/v) agar, buffered with 0.05% (w/v) MES and supplemented with 1% (w/v) Suc. After
vernalization at 4°C for 48 h, plates were placed in a 12-h day growth chamber
under 100 µ mol m −2 s −2 cool-white light. Seedlings were transferred to Metromix 360 soil 7 d after
germination. All experiments were conducted on leaves of plants that were 3 to 4
weeks after germination. This study utilized ecotype Columbia 0 of Arabidopsis ( Col-0 ), tt4-2 ( Lewis et al., 2011 ), eto1 (Chae et al., 2013), ein2-5 ( Alonso
et al., 1999 ) , and a CHS : GUS reporter ( Chory and Peto, 1990 ).

For ethylene treatments, 4-week-old wild-type, tt4-2 , and ein2-5 plants were placed in a clear plastic container that was
sealed with vacuum grease. Ethylene gas was added to achieve a 5 μL/L
concentration of ethylene within the chamber. Control plants were placed in identical
sealed containers without ethylene. After either 3 h or 24 h of incubation, leaves
were excised and used for imaging DPBA or DCF
fluorescence, or in stomatal closure assays.

Individual leaves were excised and submerged in an aqueous solution containing 0.01%
(v/v) Triton X-100 and 2.52 mg/mL −1 DPBA for 2.5 h. Whole leaves were then washed
in deionized water for 1 min and mounted in deionized water between two coverslips. A
Zeiss 710 LSCM was used to excite the leaf
surfaces with 100% maximum laser power at 488 nm and a pinhole yielding a 4-μm
cross section. We optimized LSCM settings to
spectrally separate the fluorescence of flavonol- DPBA and chlorophyll by capturing the emission spectrum for each compound
in which there is no overlap. DPBA fluorescence emission was collected between 475 and 619 nm ( Lewis et al., 2011 ). The gain settings were selected to
maximize the total flavonol signal while preventing oversaturation. All micrographs
within each figure were acquired using identical offset, gain, and pinhole settings
using the same detectors. Postimage quantification of DPBA fluorescence intensities was done by placing a region of
interest ( ROI ) around the nuclei of each
guard cell and around an area in the cytosol with no chloroplasts present. The
average intensity values within each ROI were recorded and averaged.

Whole leaves from the CHS : GUS transgenic line were
excised and submerged in a GUS staining solution (80 m m sodium phosphate
buffer, 0.4 m m potassium ferricyanide, 0.04 m m potassium
ferrocyanide, 0.05% [v/v] Triton X-100, 0.8 mg/mL
5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-β- d -glucuronide, pH 7) at 37°C
for 18 h. Leaves were removed from staining solution and washed with 75% (v/v)
ethanol for 5 min. Epidermal strips were prepared by spraying a microscope slide with
a silicone-based medical adhesive (Hollister stock #7730). After 5 min, the basal
epidermis of the leaf was gently pressed into the dried adhesive coat, and the leaf
was gently scraped with a pipette tip until only the fixed epidermis remained ( Young et al., 2006 ). Epidermal peels were
imaged using DIC imaging with a Zeiss Auxio
Observer D1 microscope with an AxioCam HRc color camera.

Samples were run on a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap XL with an electrospray ionization source,
coupled to a Thermo Accela 1250 pump and autosampler (Thermo Fisher), using a
Security Guard column in line with a Luna 150 × 3 C18 column, both from
Phenomenex. For flavonol analysis, 10 µl of each sample was injected with a
solvent of water:acetonitrile, both containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in the
following gradients: 95% to 40% (v/v) water from 0 to 5 min, 40% to 20% (v/v) water
from 5 to 20 min, and 20% to 95% (v/v) water from 20 to 23 min to recondition the
column. MS 2 fragmentation spectra of flavonols were induced using 30-kV
collision-induced dissociation. Spectra of samples were compared to those of
standards and those listed on the MassBank database ( www.massbank.jp ). Data were
analyzed by quantifying peak areas using Thermo Xcalibur software, and with
normalization to the internal standard formononetin (Indofine Chemicals). Absolute
quantities of metabolites were found by comparing peak area data to standard curves
created using pure standards of quercetin and kaempferol (Indofine Chemicals).

H2DCF-DA was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide
to yield a 50-μ m stock. This was diluted in deionized water to yield
a final concentration of 2.5 µM with 2% (v/v) dimethyl sulfoxide. The
epidermis was stained for 15 min with two drops of H2DCF-DA stain and washed with
deionized water. A Zeiss 710 LSCM was used to
excite the leaf surfaces with 1% maximum laser power at 488 nm with a 3.5 digital
gain. Settings were optimized to spectrally separate the fluorescence of DCF - ROS and chlorophyll by capturing the emission
spectrum for each compound in which there is no overlap. The DCF signal was collected
between 495 to 527 nm with a pinhole yielding a 4-μm cross section, making
sure to limit excess exposure to the laser that induces ROS . The gain settings were selected to maximize the total DCF
signal while preventing oversaturation. All micrographs within each figure were
acquired using identical offset, gain, and pinhole settings using the same detectors.
DCF fluorescence intensities were measured by placing an ROI around the nuclei of each guard cell and around an area in
the cytosol with no chloroplasts present. The average intensity values within each ROI was recorded and averaged.

Hoechst imaging was performed on whole leaves that were previously stained with DPBA . After 2.5 h of DPBA staining, leaves were washed in deionized water for 1 min
and transferred to an aqueous solution containing Hoechst at a 1 µg/mL
concentration. The leaf surface was excited with 10% laser power at 405 nm and a
pinhole yielding a 4 μm cross section. We optimized LSCM settings to spectrally separate the fluorescence of the
Hoechst stain with cell wall autofluorescence by capturing the emission spectrum for
each compound in which there is no overlap. Hoechst fluorescence emission was
collected between 420 to 546 nm. The gain settings were selected to maximize the
total Hoechst signal while preventing oversaturation.

ABA -induced stomatal closure assays were
performed with plants 3 to 4 weeks after germination. Leaves from untreated plants or
plants treated with ethylene gas for 24 h were excised and submerged in an aqueous
opening solution (5 mM KCl, 50 µM CaCl 2 , 10 mM MES buffer, pH 5.6)
and incubated under cool-white light for 3 h. To induce stomatal closure, leaves were
transferred to a similar opening solution with 20 µM ABA added to induce closure ( Jammes et al., 2009 ). After incubation in the ABA solution under white light (100 µmol
m −2 s −2 ) for 0, 45, 90, and 180 min, leaf
peels were prepared and imaged using DIC imaging with a Zeiss Axio Observer D1 microscope with a Hamamatsu 1394 ORCA-ERA
monochromatic camera ( Jammes et al., 2009 ).
Apertures were measured using ImageJ software.

Sequence data from this article can be found in the GenBank/EMBL data libraries under
accession numbers. CHS (AT5G13930), ETO1 (AT3G51770), and EIN2 (AT5G03280)

The following materials are available in the online version of this article.

Supplemental Figure S1 . Confocal imaging of Col-0 guard cells shows DPBA fluorescence in the nuclei of guard
cells.

Supplemental Figure S2 . Stomatal aperture widths in
opening solution without ABA for 90
min.

Supplemental Figure S3 . Three-h ethylene treatment
induces flavonols accumulation and decreases ROS concentrations and the rate of stomatal closure.

Supplemental Figure S4 . Subcellular flavonol
accumulation in wild-type guard cells compared with eto1 after
treatment with 20 μM ABA .

We thank Sarah Assmann and Greg Maloney for their insight, experimental advice, and
editorial comments; Greg Maloney and Marcus Wright for Orbitrap operation assistance and
advice; and Anita McCauley, Glenn Mars, and Daniel Lewis for microscopy assistance.

abscisic acid

reactive oxygen species

hydrogen peroxide

diphenylboric acid 2-aminoethyl ester

chalcone synthase

differential interference contrast

laser scanning confocal microscope

ecotype Columbia 0 of Arabidopsis

HPLC-mass spectrometry

2',7'-dichlorofluorescein-diacetate

transcription factor

region of interest

This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Agriculture National Institute of
Food and Agriculture program (grant no. 2009–65116–20436 to G.K.M.) and
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (grant no. NNX09AK82G to G.K.M.).
Grants from the National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation Program
supported the purchase of the stereomicroscope and laser scanning confocal
microscopes used in these experiments (grant nos. NSF–DBI 0500702,
MRI–0722926, and MRI–1039755) and the purchase of an Orbitrap Mass
spectrometer (NSF award no. 947028).

The online version of this article contains Web-only data.

Articles can be viewed online without a subscription.

This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.

Articles from Plant Physiology are provided here courtesy of Oxford University Press

Connect with NLM

National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894