Title: Novel organelles with elements of bacterial and eukaryotic secretion
systems weaponize parasites ofDrosophila
URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5659752/

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.

Primary site navigation

Logged in as:

Corresponding Author and Lead Contact: Shubha Govind,
Phone: 212-650-8571, Fax: 212-650-8585, sgovind@ccny.cuny.edu

Issue date 2017 Sep 25.

The evolutionary success of parasitoid wasps, a highly diverse group of
insects widely used in biocontrol, depends on a variety of life history
strategies in conflict with those of their hosts [ 1 ]. Drosophila melanogaster is a natural host of parasitic wasps of the genus Leptopilina .
Attack by L. boulardi ( Lb ), a specialist wasp
to flies of the melanogaster group, activates NF-κB-mediated humoral and
cellular immunity. Inflammatory blood cells mobilize and encapsulate Lb eggs and embryos [ 2 – 5 ]. L. heterotoma ( Lh ), a generalist wasp,
kills larval blood cells and actively suppresses immune responses. Spiked
virus-like particles (VLPs) in wasp venom have clearly been linked to its
successful parasitism of Drosophila [ 6 ], but VLP composition and their biotic
nature have remained mysterious. Our proteomics studies reveal that VLPs lack
viral coat proteins but possess a pharmacopoeia of (a) eukaryotic vesicular
transport system, (b) immunity, and (c) previously unknown proteins. These novel
proteins distinguish Lh from Lb VLPs; notably,
some proteins specific to Lh VLPs possess sequence similarities
with bacterial secretion system proteins. Structure-informed analyses of an
abundant Lh VLP surface/spike-tip protein, p40, reveal
similarities to the needle-tip invasin proteins SipD/IpaD of Gram negative
bacterial type 3 secretion systems that breach immune barriers and deliver
virulence factors into mammalian cells. Our studies suggest that Lh VLPs represent a new class of extracellular organelles
and share pathways for protein delivery with both eukaryotic microvesicles and
bacterial surface secretion systems. Given their mixed prokaryotic/eukaryotic
properties, we propose the term Mixed Strategy Extracellular Vesicles (MSEVs) to
replace VLP.

Keywords: Drosophila, immune suppression, hemocytes, parasitoid wasps, venom, virus-like particles, secretion systems, T3 secretion system, proteomics, mixed strategy extracellular vesicles



Larvae of parasitic wasps of the Leptopilina genus feed
on Drosophila larval host tissues, and eclose into free-living
adults ( Fig 1 A ). The VLP-producing
generalist/specialist L. heterotoma ( Lh )/ L. boulardi ( Lb )
wasps differ greatly in their infection of their natural host D.
melanogaster , as seen in the anterior lobes of the fly larval lymph
glands. Hematopoietic progenitors are housed in the gland’s medulla
(marked by Dome-Meso-GFP ) and mature hemocytes, in the cortex
(GFP-negative, Fig 1 B ). Lb 17 infection induces lamellocyte differentiation ( Fig 1 C ), while Lh 14 attack
causes cell loss in both the medulla and the cortex, and few cells survive
( Fig 1 D ). The differences in the
virulence of Lh versus Lb is attributed to
differences in the VLPs produced by these wasps [ 7 ] and the mechanism of Lh -induced cell killing are not understood. VLPs from Lb 17 and Lh 14 differ in morphology; Lb 17 VLPs have fewer spikes and are somewhat larger than Lh VLPs ( Fig 1 E, F )
[ 8 ]. A peripheral
membrane lipid bilayer (~ 10 nm) surrounds Lh VLPs,
which lack the typical coat-like structure found in some viruses ( Fig 1 G ). Because of their key role in wasp parasitism
of Drosophila spp. [ 4 , 5 ], we hypothesized
that differences in the composition of spiked particles produced in the venom of
both wasps underlie these contrasting infection strategies.



(A) Infection by female Leptopilina spp. parasitic
wasps introduces not only wasp eggs into the body cavities and hemolymph of
fruit fly larvae, but also venom gland products which includes spiked, 300-nm
VLPs. VLP bioactivity is known to be necessary for the infective success of L. heterotoma , rather than other venom constituents
[ 6 , 9 ]. ( B ) Intact anterior lymph
gland lobes from uninfected control Dome-MESO-GFP fly larvae.
GFP marks the stem-like progenitors in the medulla. ( C) Dome-MESO-GFP glands of Lb 17-infected larvae
show lamellocyte differentiation (white arrowhead) and lobe dispersal (white
arrow). (D) Progenitors are depleted in Dome-MESO-GFP anterior lobes infected with Lh 14. (B – D) White asterisks mark
dorsal vessels. (E) Scanning EMs of Lb 17 and (F) Lh 14 VLPs. (G) CryoEM of Lh 14
VLPs: The external lipid bilayer is contiguous, extending from spike bases
(black arrows) at the VLP core to spike tips (white arrowhead). The black
arrowhead marks area in zoom, bottom right.

To characterize Lh VLP proteomes and examine differences
in VLP protein compositions fundamental to Lh - versus Lb -specific virulence, we identified a high-confidence
proteomic dataset common to VLPs from two independently-isolated, isogenized
strains ( Lh 14 and Lh NY), whose fine
structures and activities on host cells are indistinguishable [ 3 , 9 ]. Peptide sequences from each VLP proteome
( Lh 14 and Lh NY wasps) were first aligned
against RNA-Seq Lh 14 transcripts [ 10 ], translated to open reading frames
(ORFs). We thus obtained a common set of Lh VLP proteins
(present in both proteomes; Tables S1 , S2 ) and verified these VLP protein sequences at >
90% identity against two Lh expressed sequence tags
(ESTs; ~ 30 proteins or 20% [ 11 ] and ~ 70 proteins or 45%
[ 12 ] of the common
proteome). To identify candidate pathogenicity effectors, we compared the common Lh VLP dataset to abdominal transcripts of Lb 17 and a distantly-related species Ganaspis
sp.1 (G1) that lacks spiked VLPs [ 10 , 11 , 13 ] ( Fig 2 ). A summary of our major findings follows.



Lh VLP proteome ​

Lh VLP proteins are arranged by known/predicted functions and
annotations. Key provided in center of figure. (Layer 1, outer most
layer) Signal peptide predictions are most commonly found in the
categories of virulence, immunity, and novel proteins. (Layer 2) GO
(gene ontology) terms for conserved cell biology proteins are abundant. (Layers 3, 4) The cytoskeletal/fibronectin proteins and the
majority of novel sequences lack similarity to abdominal transcripts from both (Layer 3) Lb 17 or (Layer 4) G1 female wasps. (See also Tables S1 , S2 ; Data S1,
S2 . )

No proteins with significant homology to structural proteins of any known
virus, including polydnaviruses (PDVs) associated with ichneumonid and braconid
wasps, which prey on Coleoptera, Hymenoptera and Lepidoptera [ 14 ], were found in the Lh proteome. The 161 proteins common to Lh 14 and Lh NY VLP proteomes were categorized as (1) conserved
eukaryotic proteins with core biological function (42%, Class 1); (2)
virulence/immunity-associated proteins (24%, Class 2); or (3) novel
sequences (34%, Class 3) ( Figs 2 , 3 A ). Of the ~ 160 VLP
proteins, 25% are Lh -specific (i.e., they are not
expressed by Lb 17 [ 10 ]) and most (27/41, 66%) of these proteins are
novel (Class 3) ( Fig 2 ). Class 1 sequences
contain orthologs of Drosophila and mammalian extra- and
intracellular vesicle (including microvesicle and exosome) components as well as
membrane proteins ( Fig 3 A – C ).
The presence of transmembrane (e.g., Na/K pump, SERCA calcium pump) and vesicle
transport proteins (e.g., H + -ATPase, heat shock cognate 70,
Rab proteins, and soluble NSF attachment protein receptor) ( Figs 2 , 3 A –
C ) in the proteome suggest that Lh VLPs are not
viral but instead share functional properties with eukaryotic extracellular
organelles called microvesicles, produced by animals cells, and specialized to
transfer proteins between different cell types [ 15 ].



(A) Select example Lh VLP proteins, many of which
are expected to be membrane-associated via integral or other biochemical
mechanisms, are displayed by their proteomic Classes 1 – 3 (bulleted
within descriptive subclasses). Example subclasses and individual proteins found
in enrichment analyses (B, C) are shown in red. AGT =
anterograde transport; RGT = retrograde transport. (B, C) Enrichments from Vesiclepedia: The organelle character of Lh VLPs based on GO Terms of predicted orthologs is (B) significant
and (C) highly enriched. (B) Among VLP proteins with
annotated orthologs, 71% are mitochondrial, of which 12% are
localized to the mitochondrial inner membrane. Approximately 50% of
conserved sequences in the proteome are common to microvesicles/exosomes. (C) Vesicular and mitochondrial, including that of the caspase
complex, terms are the most over-represented. Furthermore, genes within the GO
Term (GO:0008303) for pro-apoptotic caspase complexes were more than 200 times
over-represented. (See also Tables S1 , S2 . )

Candidate immune-modulating (Class 2) VLP proteins include two
diedel-like proteins with high similarities to sequences from insect viruses (60
and 62% similarity to NP_059254.1 , Xestia c-nigrum
granulovirus ; Fig 2 ; Data S1 ). Interestingly,
a Drosophila diedel modulates the IMD/NF-κB-dependent
antimicrobial cascade [ 16 ] and the VLP diedel proteins may similarly suppress host
signaling. An Lh VLP enhancin-like protein shows similarity to Yersinia spp. enhancins (42% similarity to WP_012413443.1 , Yersinia pseudotuberculosis ; Fig 2 ; Data S1 ), although enhancins are also found in insect
viruses [ 17 ]. Additional
Class 2 immunity and development proteins include: (1) imaginal disc growth
factor 4-like sequence (Idgf4) (83% similarity to XP_008560038.1 , Microplitis demolitor ); (2) fire ant
( Solenopsis )-derived venom allergen (62% similarity
to XP_008560038.1 , Nasonia vitripennis ); and (3) B-cell
receptor-associated protein 31 (89% similarity to XP_008554920.1 , Microplitis demolitor ) ( Fig
2 ; Data S1 ).
Two VLP proteins may protect and regulate parasite development: an
antimicrobial/antifungal-like knottin protein (46% similarity to XP_014233229.1 , Trichogramma pretiosum ) and a predicted
hemolymph juvenile hormone binding protein (56% similarity to ABV82429.1 , Drosophila melanogaster ) ( Fig 2 ; Data S1 ) [ 11 ].

In the Class 2 set, we also identified two families of invertebrate
immunity proteins ( Figs 2 , 3 A ). At least 6 Lh RhoGAPs were
found that, like Lb GAP of Lb [ 18 ], may inhibit parasite
encapsulation. A group of 14 metalloendopeptidases (MEPs) were also identified
in the proteome and, although they are structurally similar to proteins from
diverse kingdoms, their virulence functions may be similar to those of MEPs from
parasitic wasps Venturia canescens [ 19 ] and Nasonia vitripennis [ 20 ]. The diversity
of predicted activities of Class 2 proteins likely facilitates Lh success across a broad range of Drosophila spp.

The abundance of novel proteins in Class 3 of the proteome was
intriguing. Domain identifications predict viral domains (Pox L5 (PF04872),
Baculo_PEP_C (PF04513.10), and Baculo_11_kDa (PF06143.9)) in three VLP sequences
[ 21 , 22 ]. One of these, Baculo_11_kDa VLP sequence
also shows similarity to phage tail tape measure proteins (data not shown). In
addition to the multiple gene families in Lh VLPs that are
common to Lb and G1 (e.g., RhoGAPs and MEPs; Figs 2 , 3
A ), Lh -specific gene families include fibronectin
domain-containing sequences and a new family of GTPases ( Figs 2 , 3 A ; Data S2 ). Multiple
members of gene families are expressed in wasp venoms [ 23 – 25 ], and identification of the gene families in Lh VLPs suggests that gene duplications and
neofunctionalization underlie the powerful virulence strategy of Lh .

Because the novel GTPase peptides are of high abundance in the Lh VLP proteomes and are absent from the Lb abdominal transcriptome, we investigated their predicted
structures and functions in detail. All of the three small (SmGTPase) and five
large GTPase (LgGTPase) sequences have N-terminal signals for secretion as well
as key residues for GTP hydrolysis ( Fig 4 A
– C ; Data
S2 ). Five of the 8 (small and large) GTPase family members possess
prokaryotic domains present in eubacterial and/or archaeal (e.g., PF09488, Fig 4 A, A′ ) proteins. Beyond a few
proteins from parasitic wasps ( N. vitripennis , G1, and L. clavipes ), the closest putative homologs of these
GTPases are prokaryotic ( Fig 4 B ; Data S2 ).



(A, A′) Domain architectures of representative SmGTPase01 (A) and LgGTPase01 (A′) based on Conserved
Domains Database (CDD) and PFAM 26.0 (see Methods). (A,
A ′ ) SS = signal sequence. Starts/stops
are labeled with residue number. The E-values based on CDD domain predictions
are listed adjacent to domains. Black and red arrows mark overlapping domain
predictions in SmGTPase01 (A) and a highly helical region in
LgGTPase0 (A ′ ) , respectively. (B) A multi-sequence alignment (MSA) of Sm & LgGTPase01 (SmGTPase01 used as
query) reveals that the most significantly similar sequences in the NCBI nr and
TSA databases ( Lh ESTs excluded) are both prokaryotic and
eukaryotic (N = Nasonia ; C = Candidatus ). Four predicted active site G motifs are
labeled below the conserved consensus residues (black boxes) in the MSA. Only
the G4 consensus motif ((T/S)KVP) differs from the canonical Ras G4 motif (NKxD)
[ 40 ]. Asterisks mark
100% conservation in the motifs. The coloring scheme is according to
conventional physiochemical properties and sequence conservation. 100%
and 99 – 50% conservation levels are indicated by white
lettering and blue column boxes, respectively. (C) The predicted
geometry of the G motifs in of SmGTPase01 active site (warm, orange tones)
superimposed on that of HRas active site (1QRA; cool, blue tones). RMSD
= 3.37 Å (calculation is based on the full-length structures and
is normalized to 1QRA), TM-score = 0.74 [TM-Score > 0.5
indicates the same fold]. Distances (Å) between functionally
critical residues of SmGTPase01 and HRas are indicated by dotted lines. (D) p40 domain architecture. SS = signal sequence; TM
= transmembrane domain. Black arrows mark intron insertion sites. Based
on CDD prediction, the central domain shares sequence and structural similarity
with IpaD superfamily proteins. (E) Structural superposition of
IpaD (blue, 2J0; residues 39-284) and p40 model (red, residues 28-187). The
N-termini are oriented to the top right corner. The predicted signal sequence
and C-terminal transmembrane helix were omitted for modeling. RMSD =
4.73 Å, TM-score = 0.56225. (F) Structural
superposition of p40 model (red) to chicken spectrin (green, 1CUN; RMSD
= 2.9 Å) and to human plectin (blue, 3PDY; RMSD = 3.0
Å), using the DALI server. (See also Fig S1 , Data
S2 . )

The predicted active site of a representative SmGTPase (SmGTPase01)
coordinates GTP and the NTPase cofactor, Mg 2+ . Close
alignment of the predicted SmGTPase01 active site with the active site structure
of HRas, the canonical small GTPase, supports the domain analyses results ( Fig 4 A, A′, & C ). The large
GTPases are predicted to fold into C-terminal coiled-coils ( Fig 4 A′ ). These findings suggest a curious
blend of prokaryotic and eukaryotic properties within this new family of Lh VLP proteins, which likely have GTPase enzymatic
activity and are likely secreted from wasp cells for incorporation into
vesicles.

Prokaryotic protein motifs were identified in nearly 10% of
novel Class 3 sequences. Overlapping protein motifs,
[ Bacillus PF05103; fungal PF15577]
associated with cell division and microtubule binding, respectively, were
identified in a single Class 3 protein. KEGG Mapper BlastKAOLA identified (a)
Syd-like (SecY-interacting, Type 2 secretion systems) and (b) flgE-like
(bacterial flagellar hook) proteins with low-to-mid scores. A sopE-like
(bacterial GEF toxin) protein was also found. The presence of bacterial
secretion system and flagellar proteins is especially interesting as these
macromolecular assemblies are structurally and functionally related and the Type
3 secretion system (T3SS) of the self-assembling bacterial flagella are thought
to be ancestral to the ones found in the needle/injectisome of pathogens
[ 26 ].

Our previous antibody staining and inhibition studies uncovered an
abundant 40 kDa surface protein of Lh VLPs
(“p40”) which is necessary for lamellocyte lysis [ 9 ]. Early in VLP biogenesis, p40 is
associated with the membranes of canals that emanate from the cytoplasm of
secretory cells of the venom gland, where it is synthesized. Once in the canal
lumen, p40 is then associated with membranous vesicles that are released from
secretory cells. The vesicles mature into spiked VLPs which carry p40 both on
their surfaces and spikes [ 9 , 27 ]. The bacterial T3SS
domain from IpaD/SipD/BipD ( PRK15330 , E = 7.60 −05 )
proteins was found in residues 39-146 of p40 ( Fig
4 D ). This assignment was made by peptide mapping, cloning and
expressing polyhistidine-tagged p40 in bacteria. In western blot experiments,
anti-p40 antibody recognized this bacterially-expressed protein ( Fig S1 A ). As expected,
p40 is detected in wasp venom extracts ( Fig S1 B ). We were unable to identify a putative Lb 17 or G1 p40 ortholog ( Fig
2 ) and, to our knowledge, p40 represents the first eukaryotic protein
with an IpaD/SipD-like domain.

IpaD-like proteins from Shigella/Salmonella/Burkholderia spp. are tip proteins of
T3SS injectisomes, mediating contact and regulated delivery of effectors into
the host cytoplasm of non-phagocytic cells [ 28 ]. IpaD expression in mammalian macrophages
triggers apoptosis [ 29 ],
reminiscent of the TUNEL-positive death of fly macrophages upon Lh infection [ 7 ]. Unlike the bacterial proteins, p40 is predicted to
encode a C-terminal transmembrane helix in addition to an N-terminal secretion
signal ( Figs 4 D ; S1 C ). p40’s
transmembrane domain (this study) and its extracellular localization in venom
gland canals [ 27 ] suggest
that p40 exits venom gland secretory cells in association with microvesicle-like
structures. This interpretation is in agreement with the extracellular vesicular
proteomic profile of VLPs ( Fig 3 ).

Given the unexpected parallels in their structures and surface/tip
localizations, we hypothesized that, like IpaD/SipD on the T3SS injectisome, p40
on VLP spikes facilitates invasive contact with the plasma membrane of
non-phagocytic lamellocytes to deliver VLP contents. To test this idea, we
carried out ab initio modeling of p40. The knowledge-based
energetics of the p40 model are similar to crystal structures of similar length
(ProSA Z-Score = −6.23). 82% of model residues are found
in expected local environments (3D Verify). Superimposition of the p40 model
against IpaD confirmed the T3SS protein-like fold in p40 ( Figs 4 E ; S1 C ) [ 30 ].

Surprisingly, high-scoring matches to this fold included the vertebrate
actin-binding proteins spectrin and plectin ( Fig 4
F , superimposed with p40), further strengthening structural parallels
between p40 and IpaD/SipD. Searches for the most similar structures within the
N-terminal half of IpaD family proteins also returned actin-binding proteins
(talin, vinculin, α-catenin) [ 31 ]. These proteins are known to reprogram the actin
cytoskeleton leading to the profuse membrane ruffling observed in non-phagocytic
mammalian cell invasions by Salmonella and Shigella [ 31 ].

The composition of Lh VLPs is complex and interesting in
multiple respects but the most conspicuous observations are an absence of viral
structural proteins and the presence of conserved eukaryotic proteins with
microvesicular signature. Abundant Lh -unique proteins, including
currently novel proteins, have an unexpected diversity of domains, especially those
previously found exclusively in prokaryotic proteins. The mechanisms that
contributed to the evolution of VLP proteins (horizontal gene transfer or others
[ 32 ]) remain unknown.

Lh VLPs lack the defined symmetry and external coat found
in many true viruses including PDVs. Reminiscent of eukaryotic organelles,
precursors and mature VLPs exhibit heterogeneity in their shapes, sizes, and spike
numbers [ 9 , 33 ]. Moreover, it is noteworthy that, unlike PDVs
which are fully formed in the cells of their origin and then released by lysis or
budding [ 14 ], Leptopilina VLPs assume their final shape outside the cells in
which at least some of their proteins and vesicular constituents are synthesized
[ 9 , 27 ]. Also, there is currently no evidence for the
presence of nucleic acids in VLPs, which further distinguishes them from
DNA-containing PDVs.

VLPs are unlike endosymbiotic bacteria of Leptopilina wasps
[ 34 ].
Antibiotic-treatment of L. victoriae (sister species of Lh that make VLPs and carry
cytoplasmic-incompatibility-inducing Wolbachia ) did not affect
genomic amplification of p40 or SmGTPase01 genes. Furthermore, VLP gene loci were
amplified not only from female Lh 14 genomes but also male wasp
genomes, even though VLPs are not produced in males. BrdU incorporation studies did
not support the possibility of DNA-based VLP replication in the venom gland (our
unpublished results). The non-replicating nature of the particles, genomic encoding
of VLP protein genes, and vesicular signature of their proteome strongly suggest
that Lh VLPs are neither viruses nor endosymbiotic bacteria but
instead represent a new class of genomically-encoded, microvesicle-like organelles.
Extracellular vesicles are produced by prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells and VLPs
carry a diversity of potential immune-suppressive proteins. We, thus, propose the
alternative moniker, MSEV (Mixed Strategy Extracellular Vesicles), to replace the
VLP term.

Virulence factors of parasitic wasps have diversified in response to the
variety and complexities of their hosts’ immune systems. With a broad host
range [ 3 ], Lh wasps parasitize many Drosophila spp. whose own distinct immune
responses are supported by varying numbers and types of blood cells [ 35 ]. This may explain, first, the
diversity of putative virulence and cell death proteins with homologs across the
biological kingdoms [viral (diedel), bacterial (p40, Syd-like), and
eukaryotic (fire ant allergen, B-cell receptor-associated protein 31,
etc.)], and second, the presence of MSEV paralogs
[ Lh -specific GTPase and Lh-/Lb -common
Rho GAP, MEPs, and diedel gene families] in the proteome. Multiple members
presumably perform redundant or overlapping cell-specific functions for rapid and
robust immune suppression, much like the IκB/Cactus-like ankyrin-repeat
proteins of distantly-related bracoviral and ichnoviral PDV proteins that block
NF-κB signaling [ 36 , 37 ].

The parallels between the 3D-structure and locations of p40 with the
well-characterized T3SS IpaD-like prokaryotic proteins are provocative and suggest
that p40 likely contributes to Lh MSEVs’ unique blood
cell-killing activities. T3SS assemblies are widespread and are used by bacteria to
infect plants and animals [ 26 ]. Pseudomonas aeruginosa use their own T3SS to
rapidly infect and kill adult flies. While cytotoxic to macrophages, P.
aeruginosa infection activates the NF-κB-dependent IMD
antimicrobial pathway [ 38 ].
It is thus possible that elements of the pathogenic bacterial systems have been
co-opted by wasps to attack the fly’s cellular immune system. In this
scenario, intracellular protein complexes within lamellocytes would be under direct
selective pressure to respond to MSEV-based T3SS-like virulence.

The presence of prokaryotic-like (particularly, T3SS/flagellar-like)
proteins, hints at the possibility that either MSEV spikes evolved from primordial
flagellar/needle-like structures or they share evolutionary history with such
structures. These findings also support a hypothesis proposed by Martin and
colleagues [ 39 ] that the
eukaryotic endomembrane system may have arisen from bacterial outer membrane
vesicles. In this regard, characterization of the prokaryotic protein motifs that
comprise nearly 10% of the novel proteins outlined above will be especially
revealing. The molecular mechanisms by which MSEV proteins deplete and destroy its
well-characterized hosts’ immune system will suggest how virulence factors
are acquired by insect parasites, how these factors evolve, and how insects might
serve as reservoirs of disease. Answering these questions is likely to lead to new
cost-effective therapies for treating emerging infections and opportunistic
diseases.

Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be
directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Shubha Govind
( sgovind@ccny.cuny.edu ).

All fly stocks were healthy and free of common laboratory
infections. Genetically stable stocks with the desired, uniform genotypes
were used for infections and crosses were not necessary. The y
w strain of D. melanogaster (used as wild
type) and Dome-MESO-GFP (gift from M. Crozatier
[ 41 ]) (see Key Resource Table
(KRT) ) were used. Dome-MESO -GFP is a synthetic
construct that replaces lacZ with GFP expression in
P{dome-lacZ.MESO} (Fly Base FBtp0022619) and produces GFP marked regions of domeless (the fly JAK/STAT receptor) expression
[ 41 ]. Flies were
raised on standard fly food [cornmeal (65 g/L), sucrose (140 g/L),
agar (10 g/L), and yeast (35 g/L) with tegosept made in 95% ethanol
(22.6 ml/L) and propionic acid (5 ml/L)] (see KRT ) medium and
maintained long term at 18°C with inspection and flipping to new
vials every three to four weeks. Prior to experimental work, fly stocks were
moved to fresh food, shifted to 25°C, and maintained for at least
two generations. Adults were used for 2 to 3 rounds of egglays to produce
larvae for wasp infections. Mid to late second instar larvae (both male and
female) were used for infections and sacrificed during dissection.

All wasp stocks were healthy and free of common laboratory
infections. The following wild type parasitoid wasp species and strains were
used: Leptopilina heterotoma 14 ( Lh 14)
[ 3 ], L.
heterotoma NY ( Lh NY) [ 9 ], L. victoriae ( Lv ) [ 33 ], and L. boulardi 17
( Lb 17) [ 3 ]. (A detailed genotypic notation system has not been
formalized for Leptopilina spp. as mutant or transgenic
wasps have not been produced to date.) Lh (strains 14 and
NY) and L. victoriae are sister species with VLPs that are
indistinguishable from each other [ 9 ]. Wasp stocks were maintained at 18°C
long-term via infestation of healthy and infection-free mid to late second
instar y w D. melanogaster larvae raised on the same fly
food medium as the “fly-alone” cultures (see Fly Strain
details, above, for husbandry and housing of flies). Adult wasps were moved
to 25°C prior to experimental infections. Free-living, adult female
wasps were collected with males at approximately one week post eclosion
(PE). Mated females were used in experimental infections and were used for
infections only once. For VLP purification, female wasps were sorted from
males for dissection of venom gland apparatus (males do not possess venom
glands).

E. coli BL21 cells (see KRT for genotype)
were used for expression of the p40 central domain (CD).

For experimental infections, cultures containing both male and
female mid to late second instar D. melanogaster larvae
were exposed to 10 – 12 mated, 1 week PE, Lh 14 or Lb 17 female wasps [ 3 ] for 12 hours at 25°C. Wasps
were removed and larvae were allowed to recover in the medium for 5 hours at
25°C. Infected larvae were scooped from the medium, scored for age,
matched to y w control wasp-infected larvae, washed in
deionized water, washed in phosphate buffered saline (1X PBS, pH 7.2,
25°C), and dissected to obtain larval lymph gland tissue. Infection
was validated during dissection by the presence of wasp eggs (free floating
or attached onto larval gut tissue) and uninfected hosts were discarded.

Dissections and slide preparations were performed at 25°C.
Tissue was dissected on untreated glass slides by bleeding larvae and
pulling the cuticle bilaterally below the mouth hooks to leave the mouth
parts, lymph gland, and dorsal vessel. After air drying, excess tissue was
removed. Samples were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, washed,
permeabilized (1X PBS with 0.3% Triton X-100), and washed again in
1X PBS. Counterstains were applied (Rhodamine-tagged Phalloidin at 0.5 mg/ml
and Hoechst 33258 at 0.02 mg/mL) and samples were washed and then mounted in
VectaShield.

Samples were imaged with a Zeiss 510 confocal at 40X. Laser settings
were based on GFP negative and uninfected control tissue and all images were
scanned using the same instrument settings. Images were processed with Zeiss
LSM image browser. Figures were compiled in Adobe Photoshop v12.0.4 and CC
2015.5 and Illustrator CC 2015.

Results shown in Fig 1 were
validated in dissections of at least twenty animals (n = 20 lymph
glands) each, infected by either wasp. Results have also been validated by
infections and dissection of at least three other D.
melanogaster genotypes with replicates of at least five animals
(n = 5 lymph glands). All infection-related changes to lymph gland
morphologies were included in our conclusions (no data were excluded). No
strategies for randomization and/or stratification, blinding, or sample-size
estimation were utilized, or found to be necessary, for this study.

Three hundred each Lh 14 [ 3 ] and Lh NY
[ 9 ] female wasps
(see Wasp Strain section, above, for husbandry and housing details) of 1 to
2 weeks PE were sacrificed by submerging in 70% ethanol and rinsed
at least three times each in deionized water and 0.1X PBS (pH 7.2) at
4°C. Venom gland complexes were dissected in PBS by grasping the
ovipositor and gently pulling. Only intact, dissected venom gland complexes
with a VLP long gland, reservoir, and ovipositor were used in the
purification protocol; other body parts were discarded. Tissue was collected
in 1X PBS (4°C), gently crushed with a sterile pestle in
200μL of 1X PBS (4°C), shook vigorously in 300 μL 1X
PBS (4°C), pulse agitated, and added to the top of a 4°C
Nycodenz gradient. The gradient of 50 to 10% Nycodenz in 1X PBS (5
bands of 900 μL, each) was prepared in a clean, RNA-free Beckman 9
cm centrifuge tube and pre-chilled. Whole VLPs were separated from other
tissues into a single band by ultracentrifugation (20,000 RPM, 7°C,
80 mins). The VLP band was removed from the gradient, washed with 1X PBS
(4°C), pelleted (11,700 RPM, 7°C, 35 mins), resuspended in a
minimum of 1X PBS (4°C), and stored (4°C). Extraction of
VLPs from ~ 300 long gland complexes has consistently yielded
upwards of thousands of VLPs.

For cryo electron microscopy (EM), purified VLPs were pipetted onto
a holey carbon coated grid. Excess fluid was blotted (Whatman #1)
and the grid was plunge frozen (liquid ethane) and stored in liquid
nitrogen. Samples were visualized with a Technai G2 (200kV) at the New York
Structural Biology Center. Membrane surrounding Lh VLPs
(observed via cryo EM in Fig 1 ) was
present in all VLPs of more than two sample preparations and this result
confirmed previously-published findings from transmission electron
microscopy experiments [ 6 , 9 ].

For scanning EM (SEM), purified VLPs (washed and re-suspended, PBS)
were fixed in glutaraldehyde (3% in 0.085M sodium cacodylate buffer,
overnight, 4°C), followed by cacodylate buffer (0.085M, 1 hr,
4°C). After washing (glass distilled water) and fixing in osmium
tetroxide (1% in 0.085M cacodylate buffer, 1 hr, 4°C), VLPs
were filtered onto polycarbonate membranes (0.1 μm pores). Filtered
samples were then dehydrated in serial ethanol washes (technical grade, to
70%) and stored overnight. The membranes were washed (amyl acetate),
dried, and mounted on pin stubs. Membranes were gold-palladium plated and
stored at 60°C until imaged on a Ziess Supra 55 SEM. Parameters for
SEM imaging of Lh , Lv , and Lb VLPs were consistent for all samples and technical
replicates; data presented are representative of many particles from at
least two replicates per species’ VLP.

Purified VLPs were separated on a 1-D SDS-PAGE gel as per standard
protocols. Bands were excised, destained, reduced, alkylated, and trypsin
digested. Peptides from combined additional lanes (L457) were also analyzed.
Peptides were extracted (Applied Biosystems POROS 20 R2 beads), cleaned-up
(C18 ZipTips), dried, and reconstituted in 2%
acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Lh 14 peptides were
trapped (Waters Symmetry® C 18 trap column (180 μm
× 100 mm, 5 μm particles)), washed, and separated on a
Waters BEH130 C 18 column (1.7 μm particle size) (Waters
NanoAcquity UPLC (Milford, MA)). Lh NY peptides were
separated on a Waters BEH130 C 18 column (75 μm ×
150 mm). The MS analysis was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap (ThermoFisher,
CA).

The instrument RAW files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer
(PD) 1.4.0.288 with a work template that contained a Target Decoy PSM
Validator node (peptide spectrum matches) with both Sequest and Mascot
algorithms. Mascot searches, independent of PD, were also conducted. Peptide
mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance was 0.6
Da. The enzyme was set to “trypsin” with two maximum missed
cleavage sites and the search was against VLPSwiss_20140319.fasta (1332969
entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed
modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of
histidine, methionine and tryptophan were specified as variable
modifications. Methylation at aspartic acid residues was specified only for
Mascot analyses conducted without PD. The .msf output files were integrated
into Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.7.3, Proteome Software Inc.) which was
used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications.

VLP proteins ( Tables S1 , S2 ) reported here had at least two proteomic peptides,
identified at 99% or greater probability by either PD or solo Mascot
searches, that aligned to a target sequence. In addition, four proteins are
included in the list where only one peptide aligned at 99% more
probability (see below, Protein sequence annotations subsection).
Full-length target protein sequences were translated from RNA-Seq Lh 14 ( GAJC00000000.1 ) transcripts translated to ORFs
[ 10 ].

The number of aligned peptides varied slightly between PD and Mascot
analyses conducted without PD. The PD results have been deposited to the
ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE [ 42 ] partner repository (see KRT for link).

In this report, VLP composition is based on the subset of proteins
common to both the Lh 14 and NY strains. The common,
full-length VLP protein ORFs ( Tables S1 , S2 ) were annotated via (A) primary
sequence analyses, and (B) structure-based analyses and
predictions for select proteins (described below). Note that the Lh 14 dataset is larger and select Lh 14-unique sequences were preferentially included.

The VLP peptides were also searched against other proteomes (Uniprot D. melanogaster , A. mellifera , H. sapiens , viral, prokaryotic and archaea databases
[ 43 ]). The
full-length proteins identified from the RNA-Seq ORFs [ 10 ] were BLASTed against Lh ESTs (NCBI LIBEST 028179 and 028205, [ 11 , 12 ]), providing an alternative method of ORF sequence
verification. This step also identified the full, or near full, length VLP
protein clones in our Lh EST collection (e.g., Lh VLP Sm & LgGTPas01). Roughly 20% and
~ 45% of the common VLP proteins were identified in the
Heavner et al. 2013 [ 11 ] and the Colinet et al. 2013 [ 12 ] studies. (See below, for methods of
identification of absence/presence of expression of each Lh VLP protein in Lb 17 and G1 abdominal transcriptomes ( Fig 2 ).)

The automated, pipe-line annotation algorithms of (1) BLAST2GO, E
<= 10 −5 (v2.7.0) [ 44 ], (2) InterProScan (v5.3–46)
[ 45 ], and (3)
FastAnnotator [ 46 ]
were used to characterize all (common set) VLP proteins identified from VLP
peptide alignments to Lh transcriptome ORFs (See above).
Multiple bioinformatic methods were used to avoid algorithm bias and
increase accuracy. Two related criteria were used as measures of reliability
of annotations: (a) E values (E <= 10 −5 );
and (b) percent identity and percent similarity (applied only when at least
75% of the query aligned to the hit).

For manual annotations, BLASTs were conducted via NCBI
[ 47 ] (nr and TSA
databases, default parameters [ 48 ]). To identify potential Lh VLP
protein homologs in microbiota, the unannotated full-length VLP proteins
were pBLAST searched against a subset of all nr archaea, viruses, and
prokaryotic genomes at higher sensitivity (GenBank, E <=
10). To identify Lh VLP proteins expressed by Lb 17 and G1 , all VLP sequences were
tBLASTn searched with default parameters against GAJA00000000.1 (Lb 17) and GAIW00000000.1 transcriptomes ( Ganaspis sp1 ( G1 )) [ 10 ]. The Conserved Domains Database (CDD) [ 49 , 50 ] and PFAM [ 51 ] were used for domain identifications and
architectures. Manual annotation results are reported in main text only if
they were confirmed by a second method. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes (KEGG) Orthology (KO) numbers were assigned using GhostKOALA
[ 52 ]. KO numbers
were then used to obtain model ortholog annotations.

For pairwise and multiple-sequence alignments, T-Coffee
[ 53 ], Needleman
[ 54 ],
ClustalOmega [ 55 ],
and MUSCLE [ 56 , 57 ] (EBI webserver, default
parameters) were used and ESPript 3.0 [ 58 ] was used for visualizations. FunRich
[ 59 ] was used for
functional enrichment and over-representation analyses against two
extracellular vesicle databases, Exocarta [ 60 , 61 ] and Vesiclepedia [ 62 ]. Circos (v0.69) was used to visualize
the proteome [ 63 ].

The four proteins with only on a single aligned peptide (99%
or greater peptide probability) ( Fig 3 ; Tables S1 , S2 ) passed the
(1) manual inspections of their MS/MS spectra and fragments, (2) solo Mascot
searches, and (3) Exocarta/Vesiclepedia enrichment analyses. Of these four
proteins, one is classified as novel (Class 3; Figs 2 , 3 A ), while the
other three have sequence similarities with eukaryotic proteins (Class 1; Fig 2 , 3 ) of extracellular vesicles ( Fig 3 B, C ).

A high-quality structural model was created for SmGTPase01 using a
hybrid approach. A MODELLER [ 64 ] model was created using three templates: GIMAP
crystal structure 3V70 and two ab initio models
[ 65 ]. 3V70 was
chosen using threading metaservers (LOMETS [ 66 ] and PHYRE2 [ 67 ]) and was evaluated in single-template
MODELLER trials. Loop modeling and side-chain optimization were done using
Loopy [ 68 ] and SCWRL4
[ 69 ],
respectively. The active site of this full-length model is presented in Fig 4 C ; the remaining details of
the model will be published elsewhere.

The SmGTPase01 co-factor, Mg2+, was placed in the active
site based on COFACTOR [ 70 ] and was checked for positioning using WHAT IF
[ 71 ]. GTP was
placed and checked for energy minimization in the SmGTPase01 active site
with Autodock Vina [ 72 ]. The cofactor and substrate placements were confirmed
with predictions from COACH [ 73 ], BSP-SLIM [ 74 ], and 3D Ligand [ 75 ].

The qualities and knowledge-based energy values of our models were
assessed using ProSA-web [ 76 ] and Verify3D [ 77 ]. TM-Align was used to compare crystal structures and
our in silico models [ 30 ]. STRIDE [ 78 ] was used to define secondary
structures from molecular coordinates. Crystal structure molecular files
came from the Protein Data Bank ( http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/home/home.do ).

For p40-specific proteomics, peptides isolated and digested from an
anti-p40 positive SDS-PAGE gel band were sequenced at the Harvard
Microchemistry Facility by HPLC-MS/MS (Finnigan LCQ quadrupole ion trap) and
then BLAST queried against NCBI GAJC00000000.1 RNA-Seq Lh 14 database.

For p40 cloning and expression, the p40 IpaD-like central domain
(CD) was amplified from venom gland cDNA and cloned into pCR2.1-TOPO. Primer
sequences are listed in Key Resource Table . The p40 central domain (amino acids 26
– 240, Fig 4 D ) was expressed
from a pTrcHisA subclone by addition of IPTG (1 mM, ThermoFisher
Scientific). E. coli BL21cells were lysed by freeze-thaw in
lysis buffer (10% triton X, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA and 50 mM Tris
HCl, pH 6.8) with protease inhibitors (AEBSF-HCl 100 mM, aprotinin 80
μM, bestatin 5 mM, E-64 1.5 mM, leupeptin 2 mM, pepstatin A 1 mM,
Sigma or Fermentas). Protein concentrations in all assays were determined
with Bradford reagent [ 79 ].

For the verification of p40 identity via western analyses, bacterial
proteins were separated (SDS-PAGE, 5% stacking and 12%
resolving), transferred to membrane (nitrocellulose, HyBond, Amersham Life
Science), and blocked (PBS, pH 7.4, 0.1 % Tween 20, 5%
nonfat dry milk, 3% bovine serum albumin (1 hr, 25°C)).
Primary antibodies used were anti-p40 (1:1000) or anti-6X-His (1:1000; 12
hr, 4°C). Alkaline-phosphatase-linked anti-mouse secondary antibody
(1:2,500; 1 hour, 25°C), 5-bromo-4-chloro-3′-indolyphosphate
(BCIP, Amresco), and nitro-blue tetrazolium (NBT, Biotium) solutions in
NaCl-Tris-MgCl 2 buffer (NTM, pH 9.5) were used for
detection.

For p40 structural predictions, ab initio and
template fragment assembly methods [ 80 ] [ 65 ] were used along with N-terminal predictions from
MODELLER’s loop methods [ 81 – 83 ].
Structural optimizations were generated using ModRefiner [ 84 ]. The most N- and C-terminal
residues of p40 are predicted to be a signal peptide and transmembrane helix
and were not modeled ( Fig
S1 C ). Crystal structures ( http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/home/home.do ) similar to our in silico p40 model were identified using DaliLITE
[ 85 ].

To cure Lv adults of the strain of Gram negative Wolbachia endosymbionts [ 34 ], three successive generations of Lv females were cultivated from infections of y
w D. melanogaster egglays on fly food medium containing
rifampicin at 0.75 mg/g (see Fly and Wasp Strain sections, above, for
husbandry and housing details). The next six generations of Lv wasps were cultivated on larvae raised on standard,
antibiotic-free medium, to assure no direct drug effects. Isogenized control
wasps did not receive antibiotic treatment and were otherwise reared the
same way as experimental wasps. For PCR amplification of wasp genomic DNA,
antibiotic-treated and control male and female wasps, no more than 1 week
PE, were sorted into microfuge tubes and frozen at −20°C.
Genomic DNA template was amplified for the absence or presence of (a) Lv -specific gatB and coxA genes of Wolbachia , and (b) VLP
protein genes (p40 and Sm/LgGTPase01) (see Analyses of genomic sequences,
below, and KRT ).
Results from all PCR amplification experiments supported the conclusions in
this study.

Total genomic DNA from Lh , antibiotic-treated Lv , and control wasps was obtained using a Qiagen DNA
Blood and Tissue kit. Primer sequences are listed in KRT ; the following
notation is used:

y = pyrimidines; r = purines; and k = T and G.

Details regarding experimental replicates are provided with each Method.
As indicated in the Wasp infections, dissections, and imaging subsection, n in
this study refers to the whole lymph gland of an animal (i.e., two lobes). More
than 35 lymph glands from larvae of different genotypes yielded consistent
results after wasp infection. Similarly, examination of numerous VLPs in each
sample, as well as repetition of different EM protocols provided supporting information regarding VLP morphologies. Confidence in proteomics results is based on peptide
characterizations of purified VLP preparations from two independent strains of Lh . The criteria of agreement between multiple, independent
methods for identification and annotation of VLP proteins (both novel and
previously characterized) were met. Confidence in quantitative bioinformatics
results (e.g., E values for BLAST results and domain predictions, RMSDs for
protein model analyses, p-values for enrichments) is based on the algorithms
intrinsic to these methods and is described in the corresponding primary
references. Where possible, more than one computational approach (supported by
different algorithms and metaservers) was used to strengthen interpretation by
avoiding biases arising from a single computational methodology. No additional
statistical analyses or methods to determine assumption credibility and/or
sample size were conducted for this study.

.mzid files for all VLP protein gel bands for both L.
heterotoma 14 and NY (see MS/MS analysis of Lh VLP
proteins methodology, above) were exported from Scaffold and submitted to PRIDE,
a ProteomeXchange repository member (see KRT for links). .mzid files provide the data for VLP
peptide identification in the mzIdentML proteomics format ( Tables S1 , S2 ), a HUPO Proteomics
Standards Initiative (Proteomics Informatics Standards group) standard.

(A) Anti-p40 antibody reacts at the expected molecular weight (top bands) for the His-tagged
p40 central domain (CD, residues 26-240) from bacterial extracts, and (B) with venom extracts
(VGE) from L. heterotoma (Lh) and L. victoriae (Lv) female wasps. In panel A, S=supernatant;
P=pellet. Uninduced and induced refer to bacterial extracts prepared without or with IPTG
induction for p40 CD expression. p40's identity was also confirmed with anti-His antibody (not
shown). The p40-positive bands at higher molecular weights (B) suggest higher-order protein
associations and/or post-translational modifications. (C) Comparison of the Shigella flexneri
IpaD (2J0O) structure and L. heterotoma p40 model ( Figure 4 E ): The residue numbers for the p40
model do not include the predicted signal peptide. The first and last model residues are 26 and
213 of the predicted full length protein, respectively. The p40 model lacks the short α-helix and
β-hairpin at residues 208-251 in IpaD and the model's local quality drops in this region. 3 10 helices are found in the p40 model, in addition to α-helices. 3 10 and α-helices psi/phi angles are
similar. These 3 10 helices could render as α-helices, given slight conformational and energetic
shifts in the model. Experimental methods are necessary to validate these p40 model predictions.

A summary of proteomic data for proteins common to Lh 14 (Gel01) and Lh NY (Gel02) VLPs
purified on Nycodenz gradients is presented here. The data are organized by
our in-house VLP_Swiss-Prot identifiers. The wasp strain (column 6) from
which the greatest number of VLP protein peptides were detected is provided
first (columns 2 – 5). Data shown include protein identification
probability, peptide to protein alignment coverage, exclusive unique
spectra, and exclusive unique peptides. The number of unique peptides
detected from the second Lh strain’s VLPs (column
8) for each protein is given in column 7.

This table provides additional information not presented in the
peptide-to-ORF table (Table S1). The peptide sequences detected for each
protein from both Lh 14 (Gel01) and Lh NY
(Gel02) VLP preparations are provided along with post-translational
modifications (columns 1, 2, and 11, respectively). The SDS-PAGE gel band of
origin for each peptide can be found in column 23 (i.e., spectrum file ID).
Any redundancies in protein identifications per peptide are provided in
columns 21 and 22.

Data S1: Select infection- and immunity-related Lh VLP protein alignments (Related to Figs 2 , 3A )

Seven (A–G) Class 2 Lh VLP
proteins aligned with their most similar putative homologs from prokaryotic,
viral, and eukaryotic species (emphasis on Hymenotpera and Diptera). If
sequences were trimmed, the absolute residue range is given following the
species of origin. The coloring scheme is based on physiochemical
properties. ORF = open reading frame

(A) Two diedel-like Lh VLP sequences
with pfam13164 domains identified (E = 2.29e −12 and 1.17e −07 , diedel-like 1 and 2, respectively) are
aligned with nine similar sequences (BLASTp nr, 25 – 53%
identity; 7e −08 <= E <=
3e −01 ). Five of the putative homologs are from Drosophila spp. and are four from dsDNA insect viruses
(granulovirus, ascovirus, and entomopoxvirus). Both sequences contain
secretion signal motifs, and multiple predicted disulfide bridges. The D. melanogaster diedel, a putative homolog, is a
negative regulator of the JAK-STAT pathway.

(B) A Lh VLP enhancin-like protein is
aligned with similar prokaryotic sequences (BLAST2GO and Delta BLAST nr, 20
– 42% identity; 5.33e −04 <= E <= 9e −03 ). Multiple
sequences from Yersinia, Listeria , and other pathogenic
bacterial species were found in our BLASTs and, in a few cases, these
sequences were annotated as M60 peptidases. The VLP sequence contains a
putative secretion signal motif, but no known domains were identified. It is
notable that enhancin homologs encoded in viral genomes were not uncovered
in our searches.

(C) A Lh VLP GH18 chitinase-like
superfamily (CDD cd02873 domain, E = 0) protein is aligned with five
similar sequences (BLASTp nr, 50 – 75% identity; 0
<= E <= 2 e −143 ) from
other insects, including the yellow-fever mosquito, the Tobacco horn worm,
and three parasitoid wasps (the Jewel and two Braconid wasps). The VLP
protein sequence encodes a predicted secretion signal and is predicted to be
an Imaginal disc growth factor (Idgf)-like protein, a superfamily that
diverged from chitinase-like proteins.

(D) The Lh VLP venom allergen-like
(CDD domain cd05380, E = 1.95 e −42 ) protein is
aligned with five similar sequences (BLASTp nr, 37 – 42%
identity; 6 e −41 <= E <= 6
e −34 ) from other insects, including the red imported
fire ant, the Panamanian leafcutter ant, and three parasitoid wasps (Jewel,
a Braconid wasp, and a Chalcidoid egg parasite). A eukaryotic-specific SCP
domain, best characterized in plant pathogenesis defense proteins, has been
identified, as well as a putative secretion signal.

(E) The Lh VLP Bap31-like (CDD domain
cd05380, E = 1.95 e −42 ) protein is aligned with
five similar sequences (BLASTp nr, 59 – 76% identity; 1
e −126 <= E <= 4
e −83 ) from other insects, including two species of
ant (Florida carpenter and red imported fire ant), wasp (a Braconid and the
Jewel parasitoid), and Drosophila mojavensis . Canonical
Bap31 proteins regulate ER-stress-mediated apoptosis. Similar to these
proteins, the Lh VLP protein is predicted to encode three
transmembrane helices.

(F) The Lh VLP knottin-like (pfam11410
domain, E = 5.19 e −03 ) protein is aligned with
five similar sequences (BLASTp nr, 33 – 52% identity; 3
e −08 <= E <= 2
e −02 ), four from insect species and one from the
eudicotyledon, Mesembryanthemum crystallinum . Among the
most similar putative homologs are sequences from diverse insects:
Hymenoptera (sawfly and wasp), Diptera, and Hemipteran species. The sequence
contains a putative secretion signal motif and three predicted disulfide
bridges. 40% of the VLP sequence shows notable conservation
(54% identity) when compared to a secreted ion channel toxin from
the spider Chilobrachys guangxiensis (Arachnida:
Theraphosidae). Knottins are classified as a cystine-rich plant
antimicrobial peptide family.

(G) The Lh VLP hemolymph juvenile
hormone binding protein (JHBP)-like (pfam06585 domain, E = 6.10
e −17 ) protein is aligned with four similar sequences
(BLASTp nr, 24 – 30% identity; 1 e −11 <= E <= 6 e −03 ) from a
wheat stem sawfly, the Panamanian leafcutter ant, the diamondback moth, and Drosophila melanogaster . No high identity homologs were
found, but moderately similar homologs were found encoded by wasps, ants,
and arthropods, in general. Homologs in Drosophila spp.
were found, but are not functionally well characterized. The regions of
similarities are within 80 to 90% of the length of the VLP protein
sequence, but largely only in comparisons to putative homologs from other
hymenoptera.

Data S2: Lh VLP GTPase alignments (Related
to Figs 2 , 3A , & 4A –
C )

This document provides alignments of select small and large VLP
GTPases (including SmGTPases01/LgGTPases01) with putative homologs/paralogs
from (A) Lh ; (B) prokaryotic and eukaryotic species; (C) Ganaspis sp.1 (G1); and (D, E) Leptopilina clavipes ( Lc ). The far N-and
C-termini show the most variation among the sequences and were trimmed. The
residue range displayed is indicated after the species of origin. The
coloring scheme is according to physiochemical properties. ORF =
open reading frame.

(A) Eight Lh VLP GTPases are presented
here. Additional putative GTPase family members exist, but are not presented
here. The first three sequences of ~ 300 residues, are SmGTPases,
while the following five sequences of ~ 500 residues are LgGTPases.
Among the eight family members shown here, the percent similarities within
the N-terminal regions range from ~ 25 to 60% and average
pairwise similarity over their full lengths is 45%. Only seven
insertion/deletion sites exist in this 222 amino acid alignment and large
blocks of identity (> 80% of the alignment length) are
present. Highly similar secretion signal peptides are predicted at the
N-termini of all GTPases (not shown).

(B) The five most-similar ORFs found in the NCBI TSA
transcriptome for G1 ( GAIW00000000.1 ) are shown aligned with Lh VLP Sm/LgGTPase01s. Like the Lh VLP
GTPases, several putative G1 GTPases have predicted secretion signal
peptides (not shown). Potential G1 homologs demonstrate >=
31% and 35% identity (E <=
3e −03 and 4e −59 ) to Lh VLP SmGTPase01 and LgGTPase01, respectively (given
75% alignment coverage).

(C) The five most-similar ORFs found in the NCBI TSA
transcriptome for Lc ( GAXY00000000.2 ) are shown aligned
with Lh VLP Sm/LgGTPase01s. Similar to Lh and G1 GTPases, multiple Lc GTPases have predicted signal
sequence peptides. The Lc transcripts identified show
similarity in the N-terminal G domain, but are generally much shorter than
the Lh VLP GTPases. Lh VLP SmGTPase01
shows <= 34% identity to Lc transcripts (>= 75% alignment criterion, E
>= 2e −34 ) and LgGTPase01 shows
<= 44% identity (E >=
3e −99 ), respectively. Lc also
parasitizes Drosophila spp., but its comparative virulence
and phylogenetic distance are poorly characterized in comparison to Lh and Lb .

(D) The most similar Lh and Lc sequences have been extracted from (C) and are shown here.

We would like to thank E. Miller, J. Crissman, & J. Berriman, along with
Govind and Singh lab members (M. Badri, H. Chiu, A. Hudgins, J. Morales, I.
Paddibhatala, R. Rajwani, S. Shamburger, and B. Wey) for discussions, experimental
assistance, and reagents. This work was supported by grants from NASA (NNX15AB42G),
NSF (IOS-1121817), NIH (1F31GM111052-01A1 and 5G12MD007603-30).

Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript
that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are
providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo
copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is
published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production
process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Conceptualization, M.H., J.R., S.S., S.G.; Validation, M.H., J.R., S.S., S.G.;
Investigation (bench), M.H., J.R., G.G., G.D., R.W., S.G.; Investigation
(bioinformatics), M.H., G.G., G.R., M.S., J.K., S.S., S.G.; Data Curation, M.H.,
G.D., G.R., J.K., S.G., S.S., R.W.; Writing – original draft, M.H.,
J.R., G.G., G.R., G.D., M.S., R.W., S.S., S.G.; Writing – review
& editing, M.H., J.R., G.D., S.B., R.W., S.S., S.G.; Visualization,
M.H., J.R., G.R., S.S., S.G.; Supervision, S.G., S.S., R.W.; Funding
Acquisition, M.H., S.G., S.B.

This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.

(A) Anti-p40 antibody reacts at the expected molecular weight (top bands) for the His-tagged
p40 central domain (CD, residues 26-240) from bacterial extracts, and (B) with venom extracts
(VGE) from L. heterotoma (Lh) and L. victoriae (Lv) female wasps. In panel A, S=supernatant;
P=pellet. Uninduced and induced refer to bacterial extracts prepared without or with IPTG
induction for p40 CD expression. p40's identity was also confirmed with anti-His antibody (not
shown). The p40-positive bands at higher molecular weights (B) suggest higher-order protein
associations and/or post-translational modifications. (C) Comparison of the Shigella flexneri
IpaD (2J0O) structure and L. heterotoma p40 model ( Figure 4 E ): The residue numbers for the p40
model do not include the predicted signal peptide. The first and last model residues are 26 and
213 of the predicted full length protein, respectively. The p40 model lacks the short α-helix and
β-hairpin at residues 208-251 in IpaD and the model's local quality drops in this region. 3 10 helices are found in the p40 model, in addition to α-helices. 3 10 and α-helices psi/phi angles are
similar. These 3 10 helices could render as α-helices, given slight conformational and energetic
shifts in the model. Experimental methods are necessary to validate these p40 model predictions.

A summary of proteomic data for proteins common to Lh 14 (Gel01) and Lh NY (Gel02) VLPs
purified on Nycodenz gradients is presented here. The data are organized by
our in-house VLP_Swiss-Prot identifiers. The wasp strain (column 6) from
which the greatest number of VLP protein peptides were detected is provided
first (columns 2 – 5). Data shown include protein identification
probability, peptide to protein alignment coverage, exclusive unique
spectra, and exclusive unique peptides. The number of unique peptides
detected from the second Lh strain’s VLPs (column
8) for each protein is given in column 7.

This table provides additional information not presented in the
peptide-to-ORF table (Table S1). The peptide sequences detected for each
protein from both Lh 14 (Gel01) and Lh NY
(Gel02) VLP preparations are provided along with post-translational
modifications (columns 1, 2, and 11, respectively). The SDS-PAGE gel band of
origin for each peptide can be found in column 23 (i.e., spectrum file ID).
Any redundancies in protein identifications per peptide are provided in
columns 21 and 22.

Data S1: Select infection- and immunity-related Lh VLP protein alignments (Related to Figs 2 , 3A )

Seven (A–G) Class 2 Lh VLP
proteins aligned with their most similar putative homologs from prokaryotic,
viral, and eukaryotic species (emphasis on Hymenotpera and Diptera). If
sequences were trimmed, the absolute residue range is given following the
species of origin. The coloring scheme is based on physiochemical
properties. ORF = open reading frame

(A) Two diedel-like Lh VLP sequences
with pfam13164 domains identified (E = 2.29e −12 and 1.17e −07 , diedel-like 1 and 2, respectively) are
aligned with nine similar sequences (BLASTp nr, 25 – 53%
identity; 7e −08 <= E <=
3e −01 ). Five of the putative homologs are from Drosophila spp. and are four from dsDNA insect viruses
(granulovirus, ascovirus, and entomopoxvirus). Both sequences contain
secretion signal motifs, and multiple predicted disulfide bridges. The D. melanogaster diedel, a putative homolog, is a
negative regulator of the JAK-STAT pathway.

(B) A Lh VLP enhancin-like protein is
aligned with similar prokaryotic sequences (BLAST2GO and Delta BLAST nr, 20
– 42% identity; 5.33e −04 <= E <= 9e −03 ). Multiple
sequences from Yersinia, Listeria , and other pathogenic
bacterial species were found in our BLASTs and, in a few cases, these
sequences were annotated as M60 peptidases. The VLP sequence contains a
putative secretion signal motif, but no known domains were identified. It is
notable that enhancin homologs encoded in viral genomes were not uncovered
in our searches.

(C) A Lh VLP GH18 chitinase-like
superfamily (CDD cd02873 domain, E = 0) protein is aligned with five
similar sequences (BLASTp nr, 50 – 75% identity; 0
<= E <= 2 e −143 ) from
other insects, including the yellow-fever mosquito, the Tobacco horn worm,
and three parasitoid wasps (the Jewel and two Braconid wasps). The VLP
protein sequence encodes a predicted secretion signal and is predicted to be
an Imaginal disc growth factor (Idgf)-like protein, a superfamily that
diverged from chitinase-like proteins.

(D) The Lh VLP venom allergen-like
(CDD domain cd05380, E = 1.95 e −42 ) protein is
aligned with five similar sequences (BLASTp nr, 37 – 42%
identity; 6 e −41 <= E <= 6
e −34 ) from other insects, including the red imported
fire ant, the Panamanian leafcutter ant, and three parasitoid wasps (Jewel,
a Braconid wasp, and a Chalcidoid egg parasite). A eukaryotic-specific SCP
domain, best characterized in plant pathogenesis defense proteins, has been
identified, as well as a putative secretion signal.

(E) The Lh VLP Bap31-like (CDD domain
cd05380, E = 1.95 e −42 ) protein is aligned with
five similar sequences (BLASTp nr, 59 – 76% identity; 1
e −126 <= E <= 4
e −83 ) from other insects, including two species of
ant (Florida carpenter and red imported fire ant), wasp (a Braconid and the
Jewel parasitoid), and Drosophila mojavensis . Canonical
Bap31 proteins regulate ER-stress-mediated apoptosis. Similar to these
proteins, the Lh VLP protein is predicted to encode three
transmembrane helices.

(F) The Lh VLP knottin-like (pfam11410
domain, E = 5.19 e −03 ) protein is aligned with
five similar sequences (BLASTp nr, 33 – 52% identity; 3
e −08 <= E <= 2
e −02 ), four from insect species and one from the
eudicotyledon, Mesembryanthemum crystallinum . Among the
most similar putative homologs are sequences from diverse insects:
Hymenoptera (sawfly and wasp), Diptera, and Hemipteran species. The sequence
contains a putative secretion signal motif and three predicted disulfide
bridges. 40% of the VLP sequence shows notable conservation
(54% identity) when compared to a secreted ion channel toxin from
the spider Chilobrachys guangxiensis (Arachnida:
Theraphosidae). Knottins are classified as a cystine-rich plant
antimicrobial peptide family.

(G) The Lh VLP hemolymph juvenile
hormone binding protein (JHBP)-like (pfam06585 domain, E = 6.10
e −17 ) protein is aligned with four similar sequences
(BLASTp nr, 24 – 30% identity; 1 e −11 <= E <= 6 e −03 ) from a
wheat stem sawfly, the Panamanian leafcutter ant, the diamondback moth, and Drosophila melanogaster . No high identity homologs were
found, but moderately similar homologs were found encoded by wasps, ants,
and arthropods, in general. Homologs in Drosophila spp.
were found, but are not functionally well characterized. The regions of
similarities are within 80 to 90% of the length of the VLP protein
sequence, but largely only in comparisons to putative homologs from other
hymenoptera.

Data S2: Lh VLP GTPase alignments (Related
to Figs 2 , 3A , & 4A –
C )

This document provides alignments of select small and large VLP
GTPases (including SmGTPases01/LgGTPases01) with putative homologs/paralogs
from (A) Lh ; (B) prokaryotic and eukaryotic species; (C) Ganaspis sp.1 (G1); and (D, E) Leptopilina clavipes ( Lc ). The far N-and
C-termini show the most variation among the sequences and were trimmed. The
residue range displayed is indicated after the species of origin. The
coloring scheme is according to physiochemical properties. ORF =
open reading frame.

(A) Eight Lh VLP GTPases are presented
here. Additional putative GTPase family members exist, but are not presented
here. The first three sequences of ~ 300 residues, are SmGTPases,
while the following five sequences of ~ 500 residues are LgGTPases.
Among the eight family members shown here, the percent similarities within
the N-terminal regions range from ~ 25 to 60% and average
pairwise similarity over their full lengths is 45%. Only seven
insertion/deletion sites exist in this 222 amino acid alignment and large
blocks of identity (> 80% of the alignment length) are
present. Highly similar secretion signal peptides are predicted at the
N-termini of all GTPases (not shown).

(B) The five most-similar ORFs found in the NCBI TSA
transcriptome for G1 ( GAIW00000000.1 ) are shown aligned with Lh VLP Sm/LgGTPase01s. Like the Lh VLP
GTPases, several putative G1 GTPases have predicted secretion signal
peptides (not shown). Potential G1 homologs demonstrate >=
31% and 35% identity (E <=
3e −03 and 4e −59 ) to Lh VLP SmGTPase01 and LgGTPase01, respectively (given
75% alignment coverage).

(C) The five most-similar ORFs found in the NCBI TSA
transcriptome for Lc ( GAXY00000000.2 ) are shown aligned
with Lh VLP Sm/LgGTPase01s. Similar to Lh and G1 GTPases, multiple Lc GTPases have predicted signal
sequence peptides. The Lc transcripts identified show
similarity in the N-terminal G domain, but are generally much shorter than
the Lh VLP GTPases. Lh VLP SmGTPase01
shows <= 34% identity to Lc transcripts (>= 75% alignment criterion, E
>= 2e −34 ) and LgGTPase01 shows
<= 44% identity (E >=
3e −99 ), respectively. Lc also
parasitizes Drosophila spp., but its comparative virulence
and phylogenetic distance are poorly characterized in comparison to Lh and Lb .

(D) The most similar Lh and Lc sequences have been extracted from (C) and are shown here.

Connect with NLM

National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894