Title: TheDrosophilaSUN protein Spag4 cooperates with the coiled-coil protein Yuri Gagarin to maintain association of the basal body and spermatid nucleus
URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2915878/

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.

Primary site navigation

Logged in as:

Present address: Children's Memorial Research Center, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60614, USA

Present address: Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA

Author for correspondence ( kate@rice.edu )

Accepted 2010 Apr 30; Issue date 2010 Aug 15.

Maintaining the proximity of centrosomes to nuclei is important in several cellular contexts, and LINC complexes formed by SUN and KASH proteins are crucial in this process. Here, we characterize the presumed Drosophila ortholog of the mammalian SUN protein, sperm-associated antigen 4 (Spag4, previously named Giacomo), and demonstrate that Spag4 is required for centriole and nuclear attachment during spermatogenesis. Production of spag4 mRNA is limited to the testis, and Spag4 protein shows a dynamic pattern of association with the germline nuclei, including a concentration of protein at the site of attachment of the single spermatid centriole. In the absence of Spag4, nuclei and centrioles or basal bodies (BBs) dissociate from each other after meiosis. This role of Spag4 in centriolar attachment does not involve either of the two KASH proteins of the Drosophila genome (Klarsicht and MSP-300), but does require the coiled-coil protein Yuri Gagarin. Yuri shows an identical pattern of localization at the nuclear surface to Spag4 during spermatogenesis, and epistasis studies show that the activities of Yuri and dynein-dynactin are downstream of spag4 in this centriole attachment pathway. The later defects in spermatogenesis seen for yuri and spag4 mutants are similar, suggesting they could be secondary to initial disruption of events at the nuclear surface.

Keywords: KASH protein, SUN protein, Centrosome, Centriole, Coiled-coil proteins, Sperm basal body, Spermatogenesis

Within eukaryotic cells, a centrosome or spindle-pole body (SPB) functions as a microtubule-organizing center (MTOC) and is typically found closely apposed to the nuclear membrane. Disruption of the MTOC-nucleus association frequently leads to cellular abnormalities, including defective nuclear positioning ( Malone et al., 1999 ; Starr et al., 2001 ), abnormal morphology of cells and organelles ( Fischer-Vize and Mosley, 1994 ; Mosley-Bishop et al., 1999 ; Patterson et al., 2004 ), altered cell migration ( Gomes et al., 2005 ; Lüke et al., 2008 ) and defective chromosome segregation during mitosis ( Malone et al., 2003 ; Xiong et al., 2008 ). These findings indicate that the nuclear-MTOC association is essential in many cellular processes.

Nuclear-MTOC association is often maintained by a LINC complex comprising SUN (Sad1/UNC) and KASH (Klar-ANC-Syne homology) proteins ( Gruenbaum et al., 2005 ; Starr and Fischer, 2005 ; Crisp et al., 2006 ; Stewart-Hutchinson et al., 2008 ). SUN and KASH proteins are integral membrane proteins of the inner and outer nuclear membranes (INM and ONM), respectively. These proteins interact with each other in the intermembrane space via their C-terminal SUN and KASH domains ( McGee et al., 2006 ; Kracklauer et al., 2007 ). The N-terminal domains of SUN proteins face the nucleoplasmic side of the INM, interacting with the nuclear lamina or with chromatin ( Bray et al., 2002 ; Hodzic et al., 2004 ; King et al., 2008 ; Xiong et al., 2008 ). N-terminal domains of KASH proteins typically face the cytoplasm, and interact with components of the actin or microtubule filament systems ( Starr and Han, 2002 ; Zhang et al., 2002 ; Fischer et al., 2004 ; Wilhelmsen et al., 2005 ; Ketema et al., 2007 ). A detailed model for the mechanism by which the Caenorhabditis elegans KASH protein ZYG-12 links the zygotic centrosome to the nuclear envelope (NE) has been proposed ( Malone et al., 2003 ), which involves direct interaction of certain ZYG-12 isoforms with the microtubule motor dynein.

The Drosophila genome encodes two KASH protein genes, klarsicht ( Mosley-Bishop et al., 1999 ) and msp-300 ( Zhang et al., 2002 ) and two SUN protein genes, klaroid ( Kracklauer et al., 2007 ) and gene CG6589. CG6589 , previously termed giacomo , has proved to have sequence homology to the testis-specific mammalian SUN protein Spag4 ( Shao et al., 1999 ; Kennedy et al., 2004 ) (supplementary material Fig. S1) and thus we have re-named the gene spag4 . We show here that Spag4 has a crucial role in spermatogenesis comparable to that of other SUN proteins: it is necessary for anchoring the centriole or basal body (BB) to the spermatid nucleus. But surprisingly, this role does not require formation of a typical LINC complex with a KASH protein. Instead, we have shown that the coiled-coil cytoplasmic protein Yuri Gagarin ( Armstrong et al., 2006 ; Texada et al., 2008 ) is an essential component of the Spag4-BB anchoring mechanism, and that regulation of dynein-dynactin localization by Spag4 has a role in the process.

We first analyzed the expression of spag4 mRNA by RT-PCR, and observed that spliced mRNA is found only in male larvae, pupae and adults ( Fig. 1A ), suggesting testis-specific expression. Expression of spag4 mRNA characterized at www.flyatlas.org confirms this testis specificity. In situ hybridization demonstrated that spag4 mRNA expression peaks in the early primary spermatocyte region of adult testes ( Fig. 1B ). Low levels of the unspliced precursor transcript were observed in females ( Fig. 1A ), but appear to be functionless given the viability and fertility of spag4 -null females (see below).



spag4 expression, spag4 knockout and fertility assays. ( A ) spag4 mRNA (~800bp) is limited to males, but low levels of the primary transcript (~1000 bp) are present in male and female pupae and adults. ( B ) spag4 mRNA localization in wild-type testes by ISH. AS, antisense; S, sense probe control. Scale bar: 200 μm. White bracket: region of spag4 mRNA expression. Arrowheads indicate apical tips of testes. ( C ) Schematics (relatively proportional but not to scale) of spag4 transcription unit determined by 5′RLM-RACE and 3′RACE, and Spag4 protein and its domains. Newly identified regions of transcription unit are shown. Yellow and blue indicate 5′ and 3′ UTR, respectively. Amino acid boundaries of the TM and SUN domains are shown below. ( D ) Ends-out homologous recombination scheme for deletion of spag4 . Gray bars: PstI fragments of wild-type (bottom strand) and mutant (top strand) DNA detected by Southern blot probe (green bar). The mini-white ( w + ) gene replaces spag4 upon recombination. ( E ) Genomic Southern blots of PstI -digested DNA from wild-type flies and the five spag4 -null mutants isolated. PstI fragments and probe as in D. ( F ) Fertility assays for spag4 -related lines. Error bars indicate s.d.; n =20 for each genotype. Blue bars, males; pink bars, females.

Although all SUN proteins described to date have a transmembrane (TM) domain N-terminal to the SUN domain ( Hagan and Yanagida, 1995 ; Malone et al., 1999 ; Shao et al., 1999 ; Dreger et al., 2001 ; Malone et al., 2003 ; Hodzic et al., 2004 ; Kracklauer et al., 2007 ; Liu et al., 2007 ), the originally annotated Spag4 protein sequence contains no TM domain ( Tweedie et al., 2009 ). Using 5′ RNA-ligase-mediated rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RLM-RACE), we identified 5′ spag4 mRNA sequences encoding an N-terminus with a single TM helix ( Fig. 1C ). 3′ RACE also revealed a previously uncharacterized 3′ UTR. The corrected spag4 gene region spans ~1.2 kb of genomic DNA ( Fig. 1C ).

To determine the function of spag4 , we generated knockout mutations by ends-out homologous recombination ( Fig. 1D,E , and Materials and Methods). Homozygous mutant individuals developed normally, yielding adults that were wild type in appearance. However, mutant males [either homozygous or in trans to deficiency Df(2L)Prl ] were completely sterile ( Fig. 1F ). spag4 -null males courted, mounted and copulated with females (data not shown), suggesting that male sterility is not a behavioral defect. Mutant females were fertile, consistent with a lack of spag4 mRNA splicing in females. Male fertility was restored to spag4 mutants by introducing a single copy of a 4.9 kb genomic spag4 transgene ( Fig. 1F and supplementary material Fig. S3). A transgene generating Spag4 protein lacking the SUN domain (supplementary


material Fig. S3) did not restore fertility to spag4 -null males ( Fig. 1F ), indicating that Spag4 requires this domain for its role in spermatogenesis.

To address how Spag4 contributes to male gametogenesis, we examined protein localization in the testis using flies expressing Spag4 tagged C-terminally with 6×MYC or GFP. Transgenes similar to the spag4 rescue construct containing these tags (supplementary material Fig. S3) restored fertility to spag4 males, indicating that the tagged genes have wild-type function and that the tagged proteins are likely to localize normally. All independent insertions of both transgenes produced identical localization patterns. In general, Spag4:6×MYC gave stronger signals, but for mature sperm in the seminal vesicle, the Spag4:GFP signal was more robust ( Fig. 2J ). Most data shown here derives from Spag4:6×MYC.



Dynamic localization of Spag4 during spermatogenesis. ( A ) Whole-mount testis (excluding seminal vesicle) expressing Spag4:6×MYC. Lettered arrowheads indicate approximate regions where data in the other panels were obtained. NE localization in polar and mature primary spermatocytes ( B ) and in round spermatids ( E ). Spindle-associated localization during meiosis I and II ( C , D ); arrowheads indicate spindle fibers. Caps of Spag4:6×MYC on late round spermatid nuclei with the centrioles (γ-tubulin stained) at their apices ( F ). Focus of Spag4:6×MYC at centriolar attachment site and along dense complex microtubules (e.g. arrowhead) in early elongating spermatids ( G-G ″). A concentration of Spag4:6×MYC at the apical tip of elongating spermatid nuclei ( H , I ′) is shown by the basal body marker YFP:Asl ( I ) to lie between the BB and the nuclei proper ( I ″). This Spag4:6×MYC focus persists on mature sperm in the seminal vesicle ( J ), similarly to the BB marker YFP:Asl ( K ). Red, Spag4:6×MYC; blue, DAPI; green, γ-tubulin in F, α-Tub:GFP in G″, YFP:Asl in I and K, Spag4:GFP in J. Scale bars: 150 μm (A), 20 μm (B-G,J,K) and 10 μm (H,I).

In the Drosophila testis, germ cells are arranged in a spatio-temporal order, from the apical tip to the basal seminal vesicle. Consistent with the in situ hybridization results, Spag4:6×MYC was not detectable at the apical tip, where germ-line stem cells and spermatogonia reside ( Fig. 1B , Fig. 2A ). Four rounds of synchronous divisions yield 16 interconnected spermatogonia, encapsulated in a cyst. These spermatogonia become spermatocytes and commit to meiosis, resulting in 64 interconnected round spermatids. Spag4:6×MYC was first detected in primary spermatocytes where it was associated closely with the NE, as demonstrated by colocalization with lamin (supplementary material Fig. S4D-F). Spag4:6×MYC remained at the NE as nuclei became grooved and lobular during primary spermatocyte growth ( Fig. 2B ). Upon NE breakdown, Spag4:6×MYC colocalized with subsets of microtubules in the meiosis I spindles ( Fig. 2C ; supplementary material Fig. S4A-C), and possibly the parafusorial membranes ( Fuller, 1993 ). In late meiosis II, Spag4:6×MYC again associated with spindle microtubules (supplementary material Fig. S4A′-C′) cupping the astral region of re-forming nuclei ( Fig. 2D ). As post-meiotic round spermatids formed, Spag4:6×MYC once again localized to the NE ( Fig. 2E ).

Once meiosis is complete, the single centriole of each round spermatid attaches to its nuclear surface, and dramatic morphological changes commence. The centriole differentiates into the BB, from which the axoneme develops, and the nuclei elongate and condense to a needle-like shape. The Spag4:6×MYC protein at the NE initially transformed into a hemispherical cap (the ‘cap’) with the centriole at its apex ( Fig. 2F ). Subsequently, on the elongating nuclei, Spag4:6×MYC assumed a two-component pattern, with a focus of the protein at the centriole or BB attachment site, and a stripe of protein along the long axis of the nuclei (the ‘stripe’). From EM studies, Tokuyasu ( Tokuyasu, 1974 ) identified electron-dense material, termed the dense complex, which initially formed as a pericentriolar hemispherical cap on round spermatid nuclei and was later present as a stripe rich in microtubules along the length of the elongating nuclei. That the stripe of Spag4:6×MYC is at the position of the dense complex was established by colocalization in testes expressing α-tubulin:GFP ( Fig. 2G-G″ ). As elongation proceeded, the Spag4:6×MYC stripe along the dense complex gradually disappeared, and the focus at the BB became more compact and assumed a distinctive trefoil or bell shape ( Fig. 2H ). As shown by colocalization with the pancentriolar marker YFP:Asl ( Varmark et al., 2007 ) ( Fig. 2I-I″ ), this focus of Spag4 protein was between the caudal nuclear tip and BB, thus placing it at the ~0.5 μm indentation (the ‘dent’) in the nucleus in which the BB sits ( Tokuyasu, 1975 ). Spag4:GFP persisted on sperm nuclei in the seminal vesicle ( Fig. 2J ), as did YFP:Asl ( Fig. 2K ), suggesting that Spag4 remains at the BB attachment site in mature sperm.

This dynamic pattern of Spag4 localization is unusual; other SUN proteins localize specifically to the NE ( Malone et al., 1999 ; Malone et al., 2003 ; Hodzic et al., 2004 ; Kracklauer et al., 2007 ; Liu et al., 2007 ), microtubules ( Shao et al., 1999 ) or the MTOC or SPB ( Hagan and Yanagida, 1995 ; Xiong et al., 2008 ). However, this range of localizations for Spag4 might be more a property of the developmental process in question rather than the protein. So far, other SUN proteins have been studied in less complex developmental situations.

To address the role of Spag4 during sperm development, we analyzed spermatogenesis in the spag4 -null mutant. Our goal was to identify the first detectable defects caused by the mutation, because later problems might be secondary to these initial failures. Despite the association of Spag4 with the NE of the primary spermatocyte, in the spag4 mutant, the primary spermatocyte stage appeared similar to the wild type ( Fig. 3A,D ). However, beginning in the round spermatid stage, some disruption of the centriole linkage was detectable ( Fig. 3B,E ), which became pronounced and fully penetrant as the nuclei condensed and elongated. In contrast to the wild type ( Fig. 3C ), in all elongate spag4 mutant nuclear bundles examined, BBs labelled with YFP:Asl had lost their normal association with the caudal nuclear tips and were scattered along

the nuclear bundles (NBs) ( Fig. 3G ). Furthermore, every NB observed showed some degree of dispersion within the cysts, and the scattered nuclei frequently curled in the terminal region of the testis ( Fig. 3H ). These findings indicate that Spag4 is required to maintain the correct centriole-nuclear association, and has a role in shaping elongated nuclei.



Nuclear-centriolar dissociation during elongation stages is the earliest visible defect in spag4 mutant testes. Centriolar association with primary spermatocyte ( A ), round spermatid ( B ) and elongating ( C ) nuclei in wild-type testes. In spag4 mutant testes, centriolar association is normal in primary spermatocytes ( D ) and mostly normal in round spermatids ( E ), and early elongating spermatids ( F ). ( G ) Fully penetrant nuclear-centriolar dissociation becomes apparent in later elongation stages. ( H ) Nuclei contort in advanced elongation stages. ( I ) The microtubules of the dense complex stripe are retained on spag4 spermatid nuclei. Scale bars: 20 μm (A,D), 10 μm (B,C,E,I) and 15 μm (F,G,H).

In wild-type males, the seminal vesicle fills with mature sperm after several days of sequestration away from females. By contrast, no mature sperm accumulated in the seminal vesicles of sequestered spag4 mutant males (supplementary material Fig. S5), suggesting that developmental processes subsequent to BB-nuclear interaction also fail in the mutant. We thus investigated events during individualization, the process immediately following elongation. During individualization, elongated, syncytially connected spermatids are separated into individual sperm. An individualization complex (IC) composed of 64 actin cones that assemble around individual sperm nuclei forms, and then moves along the cyst towards the caudal ends of the spermatids ( Hicks et al., 1999 ; Noguchi and Miller, 2003 ; Noguchi et al., 2008 ). As the IC moves along the cyst, each spermatid becomes surrounded by plasma membrane, and excess cytoplasm is pushed as a cytoplasmic bulge to the caudal tip of the cyst to form a ‘waste bag’. Using TEM to analyze cross-sections of testes, we found that spag4 mutants had defective individualization. In the wild type, cross-sections reveal an iterative pattern of individualized spermatids, each with a single axoneme and major and minor mitochondrial derivative (MD) surrounded by plasma membrane ( Fig. 4D ). In spag4 mutant cysts, arrays of axonemes each associated with a single major and minor MD were also seen ( Fig. 4E ). Furthermore, although axoneme structure was not analyzed in detail, it appeared grossly normal, with a small number of axonemes lacking the central microtubule doublets (typically less than 10 axonemes/cyst). However, both MDs showed failure to condense fully, a problem that was most marked for the minor MD. But most strikingly, plasma membrane investment largely failed to occur ( Fig. 4D,E ) and copious amounts of cytoplasm remained in the mutant cysts ( Fig. 4E ). Thus, sperm individualization and cytoplasmic elimination are severely affected in the spag4 mutant.



Individualization fails in the spag4 mutant testes. ( A ) Normal actin cones of the individualization complex (IC) form on wild-type elongated nuclei. ( B ) Abnormal actin deposition forms aberrant ICs in the spag4 mutant. ( C ) Lack of actin deposition on curled nuclei in the spag4 mutant. ( D ) TEM of wild-type elongated cyst cross-section. Black lines denote axis through the central doublet of the axoneme; within a wild-type cyst, spermatid cross-sections (red lines) lie at a constant angle (clockwise 45° to the central doublet. ( E ) In spag4 mutant cysts, aberrant angles demonstrate spermatid-axoneme misalignment. Red arrowhead indicates missing central doublet in spag4 axoneme. Images in D and E were taken in comparable regions of wild-type and mutant testes (towards terminal epithelium, immediately apical to cyst coiling region). Black arrows indicate major mitochondrial derivatives (MDs) and white arrows, minor MDs. Black arrowhead in D indicates plasma membrane. Both major and minor MDs are less condensed in spag4 mutant than in the wild type, and large regions of ribosome-rich cytoplasm persist in the cysts (blue dotted line). Scale bars: ~10 μm (A-C), 500 nm (D,E).

A spatially controlled caspase cascade used in a non-apoptotic context promotes spermatid individualization ( Huh et al., 2004 ; Muro et al., 2006 ). We found that caspase activation, as monitored with an antibody (anti-CM1) that recognizes the active form of the Drosophila effector caspase Ice ( Arama et al., 2003 ; Muro et al., 2006 ; Zhong and Belote, 2007 ), was similar in spag4 mutant and wild-type testes (supplementary material Fig. S6A-B′). Successful activation of caspase was further confirmed by staining testes with Acridine Orange, a dye taken up by cysts undergoing individualization. (supplementary material Fig. S6A″,B″) ( Arama and Steller, 2006 ). Thus, defective individualization in the mutant is not due to defective caspase activation. Instead, the defects appear to originate in aberrant formation of ICs. In the spag4 mutant, the individual actin cones were disrupted, with cones no longer forming organized ICs ( Fig. 4A,B ). In bundles of contorted nuclei, actin cones were often missing altogether ( Fig. 4C ). The disorganized ICs tended not to progress caudally, and mutant testes lacked cytoplasmic bulges and waste bags, indicating failures in individualization (supplementary material Fig. S6). Despite failed individualization, the elongated syncytial cysts in spag4 mutants attempted the final coiling process that precedes sperm movement

into the seminal vesicle: the terminal region of mutant testes thus filled with coiling cysts (supplementary material Fig. S5D).

spag4 encodes a SUN protein and localizes to the NE during most of spermatogenesis. Furthermore, the SUN domain is essential for the role of spag4 in male fertility ( Fig. 1F ). These findings suggest that Spag4 functions as a typical SUN protein, forming a LINC complex with a KASH protein partner. However, our data indicate that neither of the two Drosophila KASH proteins (Klarsicht and MSP-300) is a Spag4 partner in the testis. For both genes, mutations that eliminate the KASH domain are available: msp300 Δ KASH was generated by ends-out recombination ( Xie and Fischer, 2008 ) and the klar CD4 mutation came from EMS mutagenesis that generated a suitably positioned stop codon ( Mosley-Bishop et al., 1999 ; Fischer et al., 2004 ; Guo et al., 2005 ). Mutant males of both genotypes were fertile ( Fig. 5A ) and in all cysts examined for msp300 Δ KASH males, klar CD4 males and msp300 Δ KASH ; klar CD4 double-mutant males, (44-95 cysts in 10 testes per genotype), the centrioles remained associated with the spermatid nuclei during elongation ( Fig. 5B-D ) and nuclear bundling, IC formation and IC progression were normal. There was no heterozygous effect of the spag4 -null genotype on the fertility of klar CD4 mutant males ( Fig. 5A ) and the only aberrancy detected in the spermatid cysts of these

various genotypes was the occasional apical mislocalization of nuclear bundles in klar CD4 and msp300 Δ KASH ; klar CD4 double-mutant males (data not shown). The doubly mutant males were somewhat subfertile ( Fig. 5A ), but this probably reflects defects in the testis sheath (data not shown) that are not found in the singly mutant males.



Linking the spermatid nucleus to the centriole or BB does not require a KASH domain protein. ( A ) Fertility assays for KASH-domain protein alleles. n =20 for each genotype. Error bars indicate s.d. All genotypes are at least partially fertile. The large error bars in msp300 Δ KASH ; klar CD4 double mutants are due to high (40%) male death during the assay. Compare with Fig. 1F for wild-type male fertility levels. Centriolar-nuclear attachment is normal in elongating nuclei bundles from klar CD4 ( B ), msp300 Δ KASH ( C ) and msp300 Δ KASH ; klar CD4 ( D ) mutant males as shown by tight juxtaposition of γ-tubulin staining (red) of the centriolar adjunct to the dent component of Yuri staining (green, see text, Fig. 6J and supplementary material Fig. S7). Scale bar: 10 μm.

By contrast, both the male sterile phenotype of spag4 and the post-meiotic localization pattern of Spag4:6×MYC are compellingly similar to findings for a male sterile mutation of the yuri locus ( yuri F64 ) and for Yuri nuclear localization ( Texada et al., 2008 ). yuri is a complex locus encoding three major classes of ubiquitously expressed isoforms. The longer isoforms largely consist of coiled-coil regions. The yuri F64 mutation eliminates expression of the middle size Yuri isoforms globally, but, uniquely in the testis, the shortest isoform is also not expressed. This loss of two isoforms in the testis might explain the observation that the yuri F64 mutant exhibits male sterility, but no other developmental phenotype. An antibody that detects all isoforms showed Yuri accumulation in the postmeiotic nuclear cap, dent and stripe patterns exactly as described above for Spag4 and confirmed here by localization ( Fig. 5B-D , Fig. 6 ) and colocalization (supplementary material Fig. S7) studies. In yuri F64 , this nuclear localization of Yuri was absent and, as in the spag4 -null, the centrioles lost their normal attachments to the post-meiotic nuclei and the NBs became disorganized, with nuclei forming curled, distorted shapes. Similar defects in late spermatogenesis were also shared by yuri F64 and spag4 -null flies, including failure of actin cone formation and individualization, aberrant MD condensation, abortive coiling and absence of mature sperm in the seminal vesicle.



Spag4 and Yuri localize to nuclear envelopes, cap, BB dent and stripe during spermatogenesis. Spag4 and Yuri localization at the NE of primary spermatocytes ( A , B ), at the centriolar cap on round spermatids ( C , D ) and in the BB dent and stripe on elongating nuclei ( E , F ) are compellingly similar. F ′ shows Yuri localization on a single elongate nucleus. In the spag4 mutant, Yuri fails to localize to the NE of primary spermatocytes ( G ) and to the centriolar cap ( H ) and the BB dent and stripe ( I ) at later stages. However, Yuri accumulates on the BB and overlays the CA (I). I ′ also shows absence of Yuri stripe and Yuri accumulation on BB for a single nucleus. Upper arrows in F′, I′ show position of BB, lower arrows show position of stripe. Yuri accumulation on the centrioles of primary spermatocytes is also intermittently seen in the spag4 mutant (arrow, G). In yuri F64 , most elements of the Spag4 localization pattern remain ( J , K ) but accumulation at the BB dent is lost ( L ). Control genotypes: in A, w;; spag4:gfp ; in C,E, w;; spag4:6xmyc ; in B,D,F,F′, w 1118 . Scale bars 25 μm (A,B,G,J), 15 μm (C,D,H,K), 10 μm (E), 6 μm (F,F′,I,I′,L).

Although Yuri contains neither a transmembrane nor a KASH domain, these data clearly suggest that Spag4 and Yuri are components of the same pathway for centriolar-nuclear association. Furthermore, previous findings for cytoplasmic dynein suggest that it also has a role in this process ( Li et al., 2004 ). Dynein accumulates in the cap pattern on round spermatid nuclei seen for Spag4:6×MYC and Yuri, and loss of this dynein cap in a null mutation of dynein light chain gene Dlc90F results in failure of centriole-nucleus association. We therefore investigated the interactions between these three components further.

As shown above, Spag4 accumulated on the NE of primary spermatocytes, and then decorated the spindle during meiosis. Yuri localization was not determined during these early stages previously ( Texada et al., 2008 ), and was thus investigated as part of this work. We discovered that although Yuri was present on the primary spermatocyte NEs in some spermatocyte cysts ( Fig. 6B ), it was not present at all stages, suggesting that its presence there is regulated. On round spermatid nuclei, Yuri and Spag4 both formed centriolar caps ( Fig. 6C,D ), and the proteins colocalized to the stripe and dent in elongating spermatids (supplementary material Fig. S7; Fig. 6E,F,F′ ).

In contrast to Spag4:6×MYC, Yuri was not detected on the meiotic spindles, and showed diffuse cytoplasmic staining during these divisions. However, Yuri was sometimes detected associated with the centrioles at the NE immediately before meiosis I (data not shown), and routinely Yuri localized to a circumferential ring on the single centrioles at the meiosis II spindle poles (supplementary material Fig. S8). In spag4 -null flies, Yuri was never detected on the NE of primary spermatocytes, but now could be found on some of the V-shaped centriole pairs at the periphery of these cells ( Fig. 6G ). No obvious new localization of Yuri emerged during meiosis. But strikingly, the post-meiotic positioning of Yuri relative to the spermatid nuclei and centrioles was dramatically altered in the spag4 mutant. All elements of the usual nuclear pattern – the cap, dent and stripe – were lost ( Fig. 6H,I ), and at the onset of nuclear elongation, Yuri began to accumulate ectopically on the dissociating centrioles ( Fig. 6I ). During elongation, as the centrioles become BBs, the toroid-shaped centriolar adjunct (CA) develops around the rod-like core of the BB ( Texada et al., 2008 ). γ-tubulin is confined to the CA and thus provides an excellent marker for these toroid structures. Using Yuri and γ-tubulin staining, we determined that Yuri not only accumulated on the rod of the BB proper but also frequently coated the outer surface of the CA ( Fig. 6I′ ).

Conversely, in the yuri F64 mutant, Spag4:6×MYC accumulation on the primary spermatocyte NEs, the meiotic spindles, and in the cap and stripe remained unaltered ( Fig. 6J,K,L ). However, one element of the Spag4 distribution pattern was lost: Spag4:6×MYC no longer accumulated at the dent representing the BB attachment site ( Fig. 6L ). Thus, with the exception of this site, the interactions between the two proteins are very similar to those predicted for a SUN-KASH protein pair.

The effect of loss of the dynein cap at the round spermatid stage (in a Dlc90F -null mutant) on the nuclear location of Yuri was reported by Texada and co-workers ( Texada et al., 2008 ). Notably, the effect is similar to that described here upon loss of Spag4: the Yuri cap is strongly reduced, the stripe and dent components never

develop, and Yuri accumulates on the BB proper. Thus both spag4 and dynein have a role in positioning Yuri on the NE. That Yuri has no role in positioning dynein was determined by examining the location of p50:GFP, a tagged subunit of a dynactin, which is a well-established dynein interaction partner ( Wojcik et al., 2001 ). p50:GFP shows identical localization to dynein at the nucleus and meiotic spindles during spermatogenesis ( Li et al., 2004 ; Anderson et al., 2009 ), including accumulation in the cap on round spermatid nuclei. In the yuri F64 mutant, this localization pattern for p50:GFP on the spermatid nuclei remained unchanged ( Fig. 7G ).



Dynein-dynactin components require Spag4, but not Yuri, for localization during spermatogenesis. Spag4:6×MYC localization is essentially normal in ( A ) primary spermatocytes, ( B ) round spermatids and ( C ) elongating spermatids in the Dlc90F e155 mutant background, although elongating nuclei fail to remain in register. Conversely, the p50:GFP dynactin subunit, which localizes to the centriolar cap on wild-type round spermatid nuclei ( D-D ″), fails to localize normally in the spag4 -null mutant, aggregating instead on centrioles on round spermatid nuclei ( E ) and in puncta on the CAs of elongating nuclei ( F ). ( G ) Localization of p50:GFP to the centriolar cap is unaffected in the yuri F64 mutant. Scale bars: 25 μm (A), 10 μm (B-D′,F,G), 8 μm (E).

Throughout spermatogenesis, Spag4:6×MYC localization was unaffected in the Dlc90F e155 -null mutant ( Fig. 7A-C ), indicating that dynein has no role in Spag4 positioning at the NE. But conversely, results for p50:GFP suggest that spag4 has a role in the localization of dynein-dynactin both before and after meiosis. In spag4 -null primary spermatocytes, p50:GFP accumulation at the nuclear membrane was lost and instead, similarly to localization of Yuri, p50:GFP accumulated on the paired centrioles at the spermatocyte periphery (data not shown). Likewise, p50:GFP was not detected in the hemispherical cap on round spermatids in spag4 -null flies, but again, similarly to Yuri in the spag4 mutant background, accumulated on the BB ( Fig. 7E ), However, at this stage, the p50:GFP accumulation pattern on the BB was distinct from that of Yuri. All of the p50:GFP was associated with the CA torus, upon which it formed a distinctive pattern of dots around the circumference of the structure ( Fig. 7F ). These findings indicate that Spag4 is required to bring dynein-dynactin to the nuclear membrane, whereas Yuri, by contrast, requires dynein-dynactin for its accumulation there. A pathway in which the order of gene action is spag4 - dynein-dynactin - yuri is thus in operation. This model suggests that Spag4 and dynein-dynactin, and Yuri and dynein-dynactin should be simultaneously present at the nuclear surface. Colocalization studies established that these pairs of proteins and all three components together could be detected simultaneously on primary spermatocyte and round spermatid nuclei (supplementary material Fig. S9).

In this study, we describe the role of Spag4, a Drosophila SUN protein. Spag4 is primarily required for linking the centriole and later the BB, two forms of the MTOC of the spermatid, to the nucleus of the elongating spermatid during spermatogenesis. In other contexts, KASH proteins are the essential partners of SUN proteins, forming LINC complexes that tether centrosomes to the NE. However, in single and double mutants of the two KASH protein genes of Drosophila lacking the KASH domain, centriole attachment to the spermatid nucleus is normal. Thus Spag4 appears to mediate this interaction by a mechanism that does not involve a typical LINC complex. Consistent with this notion, we have found that Spag4 localization on elongated spermatid nuclei is independent of lamin (supplementary material Fig. S10D), which in other contexts is essential for NE localization of LINC complexes. Dictyostelium discoideum cells lack a nuclear lamina, and the SUN protein Sun-1 is thought to interact with chromatin directly ( Xiong et al., 2008 ). Mature sperm also lack a normal nuclear lamina, suggesting that Spag4 might also directly link to chromatin. These unusual features of Spag4 might partly reflect the highly specialized centriole-nuclear interaction that it facilitates. As the Drosophila spermatid centriole differentiates into the BB, complex structural rearrangements occur, followed in the final stages by altered relative positioning of the BB and the nucleus ( Tokuyasu, 1974 ; Tokuyasu, 1975 ).

In contrast to the KASH proteins, our studies have identified the coiled-coil protein Yuri as an essential component of the postmeiotic Spag4 centriole-tethering pathway. In the post-meiotic stages, Yuri shows identical nuclear positioning to Spag4, and Spag4 is essential for localization of Yuri to its various nuclear sites. These observations place Yuri downstream of Spag4 in the pathway. However, at the nuclear dent, in which the BB sits, there is mutual dependence between the two proteins for correct localization.

In addition to this post-meiotic pathway, a pre-meiotic mechanism exists to bring the centriole pairs of the primary spermatocyte to the NE for function in meiosis. The gene asunder ( asun ) is required for this process, which involves accumulation of Asun itself, and Asun-dependent accumulation of dynein (and p50:GFP) at the primary spermatocyte NE ( Anderson et al., 2009 ). As we show here, both Spag4 and Yuri also associate with the primary spermatocyte NE, with localization of Yuri there being Spag4-dependent. However, in contrast to an asun mutant, no defects in meiosis were found in yuri F64 or spag4 -null spermatocytes. Thus, no immediate role for the two proteins in pre-meiotic centriole-nuclear association can be postulated. During meiosis, Spag4 is associated with the spindle and astral microtubules. Although a role for SUN proteins in tethering telomeres to the NE during meiosis has been described ( Ding et al., 2007 ; Penkner et al., 2007 ), we could not detect altered telomere distribution in spag4 -null meiosis (data not shown). The functions of Yuri and Spag4 in these early stages are thus obscure. Association of Spag4 with the spindle could simply represent a storage location.

If Spag4 were a typical SUN protein, its transmembrane domain would traverse the INM, placing its C-terminus in the intermembrane space to interact with a KASH-domain protein spanning the ONM. However none of the isoforms of Yuri has either a transmembrane domain or KASH domain, indicating that a direct interaction between the two proteins in the intermembrane space is unlikely. Thus, despite our evidence that the two known Drosophila KASH proteins have no role here, it seems likely that some other ONM protein is needed to bring Yuri and Spag4 together. Our findings on the role of cytoplasmic dynein-dynactin also make a direct interaction of Yuri and Spag4 unlikely. The order of gene action in the pathway appears to be spag4 – dynein-dynactin – yuri , again probably precluding a direct Spag4-Yuri interaction.

Given these indications of indirect interaction, it is pertinent to ask where Yuri is localized relative to the NE. Previous EM studies (A. D. Tates, PhD thesis, Leiden University, 1971; Tokuyasu, 1974 ) have shown that the initial cap component of the dense complex forms in a tight compartment between the nuclear membranes proper and a layer of closely apposed ER tubule. In other tissues, we have established that Yuri shows a strong association with the ER rather than the nuclear membranes per se (Michael J. Texada, Rebecca A. Simonette and William J. Deery, unpublished results). It seems likely therefore that Yuri is not bound to the nuclear membranes, but rather is in close apposition to them through association with the overlying ER. If Spag4 is in the inner nuclear membrane, and Yuri in the overlying ER, several components, including an ONM protein and dynein-dynactin, probably link the two proteins. However, given its unusual interactions, Spag4 might not reside in the INM and thus fewer intermediates might be in play.

The pathway described above is adequate to address the relationship of Yuri and Spag4 at most elements of their nuclear-localization patterns. However, at the dent, further interactions must be invoked, because at this site, localization of the two proteins is mutually dependent. This role of Yuri in positioning Spag4 is unlikely to involve dynein-dynactin, because Yuri has no effect on the localization of p50:GFP(dynactin) at the nuclear surface. Thus additional molecular interactions must take place. Yuri has three isoforms, and it is possible that at this site, an isoform not active at the other locations is in operation (see further discussion below). Our antibody detects all Yuri isoforms, and thus provides no information on individual isoform location.

The different molecular activities at the dent and stripe might reflect different roles for the proteins at these two locations. The dent is closely associated with the BB, and at this site the two proteins function in centriole retention and maturation. The stripe is far removed from this position, and it has been suggested that it might strengthen the nuclei along their long axes during elongation and chromatin condensation ( Tokuyasu, 1974 ). Consistent with this possibility, in both the yuri F64 and the spag4 mutants, the fully elongated nuclei are frequently coiled and distorted along their long axis. The stripe contains microtubules, and interestingly, there is evidence that the stripe microtubules represent a distinct class of structures that do not originate from the BB (Tatsuhiko Noguchi, unpublished results).

In some ways Yuri is comparable with the KASH protein ZYG-12, which tethers the centrosome to the nucleus in the Caenorhabditis elegans zygote by a mechanism involving dynein ( Malone et al., 2003 ). Similarly to Yuri, ZYG-12 is a coiled-coil protein with three isoforms. Furthermore, the longer isoforms of Yuri contain a ~127 residue region with 24% identity and 46% similarity to the ZYG-12 isoforms (supplementary material Fig. S1B). The ZYG-12A isoform localizes to the centrosome, and the B and C isoforms localize to the NE. Direct interaction of the B and C isoforms with dynein leads to close association of the centrosome and nucleus, dimerization of B and C with the A variant, and formation of a stable centrosome-nucleus link. We detected association of Yuri with the centrioles during meiosis II, that is, immediately before Yuri begins to function in maintenance of post-meiotic centriole-nuclear attachment (supplementary material Fig. S8). Furthermore, we identified a role for dynein-dynactin in association of Yuri with the nuclear surface. Given these parallels with ZYG-12, it seems possible that the Yuri isoforms might show differential localization between the centriole and the nuclear surface, and that some Yuri isoforms interact directly with dynein. The overall similar behavior of p50:GFP and Yuri in the spag4 mutant supports the hypothesis of direct interaction with dynein, but at the same time indicates that Yuri is not directly associated with the dynactin component per se, because the precise localizations of Yuri and p50:GFP on the developing BB in the spag4 -null mutant are distinctly different (compare Fig. 6I,I′ and Fig. 7F ).

Mutations in yuri and spag4 result in dissociation of BBs from spermatid nuclei, subsequent curling of the elongate nuclei and finally, failure of individualization. Although BB behavior has not been examined for a mutation to Pros-α6T (a testis-specific proteasome subunit), nevertheless, curled, mislocalized spermatid nuclei are found in this mutant along with aberrant actin cone formation and failed individualization ( Zhong and Belote, 2007 ). Therefore, results for spag4, yuri and Pros -α 6T suggest that dissociation of BB from the nuclei and/or contortion of elongated nuclei correlate with failed IC formation and progression.

How BB detachment from nuclei and nuclear contortion would affect formation of individual actin cones and progression of the IC is not apparent. One possibility is that components of the dense complex at the cap and/or stripe are requisite precursors for formation of actin cones. Actin cone formation begins with the deposition of F-actin filaments along the long axis of the nuclei ( Noguchi et al., 2008 ). The dense complex materials at the cap and the stripe contain F-actin, and this F-actin is lost in yuri F64 ( Texada et al., 2008 ). EM examination of the formation of F-actin filaments on the final nuclei of the spag4, yuri F64 and Pros -α 6T mutants would address this issue. The male sterile mutation ms(3)72D also produces contorted spermatid nuclei ( Castrillon et al., 1993 ) and might thus also be defective in BB-nuclear attachment, actin cone and IC formation, and sperm individualization.

In summary, we have identified Spag4 as a component of a centriolar-nuclear attachment pathway in spermatogenesis that also requires the coiled-coil protein Yuri and cytoplasmic dynein-dynactin. Although Spag4 is a SUN protein, its action in this pathway appears not to involve a conventional KASH protein. The disruption of the later stages of spermatogenesis in yuri and spag4 mutants might be secondary to the general disruption of events at the spermatid nuclear surface produced in these mutants.

Transgenic lines were prepared by standard methods at UT Austin or at Genetic Services (Sudbury, MA). Standard genetic crosses were used to introduce: (1) transgenes pC4-spag4, pC4-spag4 : gfp, pC4-spag4 : 6xmyc, pC4-spag4-SUNstop and p50:GFP into the background of spag4 -knockout allele #6 and (2) pC4-spag4 : 6xmyc and p50:GFP into the yuri F64 background. p50:GFP and Dlc90F e155 /TMB Tb were obtained from Thomas Hays, University of Minnesota, MN, USA. w, α Tub : gfp, w, yfp : asl lines ( Rebollo et al., 2004 ; Varmark et al., 2007 ) and the deficiency spanning spag4 Df(2L)Prl , were obtained from Cayetano Gonzalez, Institute for Research and Biomedicine, Barcelona, Spain and the Drosophila Stock Center (Bloomington), respectively.

Molecular biology manipulations were performed using standard techniques. Unless specified, SuperScript II RT reagents and Platinum PCR Supermix (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) were used, and primers from Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA). Primer sequences are provided in supplementary material Fig. S2. DNA sequencing was performed at the UT Austin ICMB Core Facility.

Total RNA from ten male or female larvae, pupae and adults was isolated and treated with DNase I, as described ( Kracklauer et al., 2007 ). RT was performed using an oligo (dT) primer followed by PCR with primers P1 and P2.

RT-PCR was carried out using male pupal total RNA isolated as recommended in the FirstChoice RLM-RACE kit protocol (Ambion, Austin, TX), and then used in 5′ RLM-RACE and 3′ RACE. The 5′ end of the gene was amplified using the RNA adapter-specific forward outer and inner primers, and the gene-specific reverse primer P3. To amplify the 3′ end of the gene, anchored oligo-(dT) adapter primers from the FirstChoice kit were used in RT. In the PCR, the gene-specific forward primer P4 and the 3′ adapter-specific outer primer were used. 5′ and 3′ RACE products were subcloned into pGEM-T-Easy (Promega, Madison, WI) and their sequences verified. A complete spag4 cDNA with 5′ and 3′ UTRs was generated by PCR using a mixture of partially overlapping RACE products as template and the 5′ and 3′ adapter-specific primers. The final PCR product was subcloned into pGEM-T-Easy, sequenced and catalogued as EF537040 at NCBI.

The transgene pC4-spag4 was generated by ligating the spag4 coding region as a 4.9 kb Pst I fragment from BACR02J20 into the Pst I site of pCaSpEr-4 (pC4) ( Thummel and Pirrotta, 1992 ). The GFP-tagged version, pC4-spag4 : gfp, was generated by ligating the GFP ORF from pUAST-gfp ( Kracklauer et al., 2007 ) immediately downstream of the spag4 coding region in pC4-spag4 . For this purpose, an Asc I site was introduced immediately upstream of the spag4 stop codon using the QuikChange II PCR Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene) and primer pair P13-P14. The GFP ORF with Asc I sites on both ends (generated by PCR using primers P11-P12 on the pUAST-gfp template) was then cloned into this Asc I site. To generate pC4-spag4 : 6xmyc , a 6xmyc ORF was amplified from the pUAST-6xmyc vector ( Kracklauer et al., 2007 ) using the PCR primers P15 and P16, and the ORF was then cloned into the Asc I site as for pC4-spag4 : GFP . To generate pC4-spag4 SUNstop , a stop codon was introduced into the 4.9 kb Pst I fragment using the mutagenic primers P21-P22, and the resulting mutated fragment was cloned into the Pst I site of pC4 as described above.

The targeting construct ( pW35-spag4 HRKO ) was generated as follows. DNA sequences of ~3 kb (upstream) and ~5 kb (downstream) flanking the spag4 coding region were amplified by PCR using hot-start Herculase (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA), primer sets P5-P6 and P7-P8, and BAC02J20 (Open Biosystems, Huntsville, AL) as template. PCR products were subcloned into pGEM-T-Easy and their sequences verified. The upstream 3 kb fragment was excised from pGEM-T-Easy with Not I and cloned into that site of pW35 ( Gong and Golic, 2003 ). The downstream 5 kb fragment was excised from pGEM-T-Easy with Bam HI and Avr II, then cloned into those sites in pW35 downstream of the w + marker gene, resulting in pW35-spag4 HRKO . After generation of transgenic lines, a cross of 500 y w, pW35 spag4 HRKO / FM7c, gfp virgin females with 500 (y) w;; [hs-FLP],[hs-I-SceI]/TM3, Sb males was set up with subsequent embryo manipulation and heat shocks, as described previously ( Kracklauer et al., 2007 ). ~400 crosses of 3-4 w + -mosaic (y) w, pW35-spag4 HRKO /+;; [hs-FLP],[hs-I-SceI]/ + F1 virgin females and 3-4 w; hs-FLP males were performed. F2 progeny were screened for a single male from each cross with solid w + eyes, indicative of targeted insertion events. Insertions were mapped for 100 independent F2 candidate knockout males using standard methods; for 87 candidates, the insertion mapped to chromosome 2 as expected. For ~50 such stocks, spag4 targeting was assessed by Southern blotting ( Kracklauer et al., 2007 ). Ultimately, five independent spag4 knockout alleles – 1, 6, 11, 12 and 15 – were isolated. Allele 6 was used for most studies.

Twenty individual spag4 homozygous or spag4/Df(2L)Prl males were each crossed to two w 1118 virgins. As a control, 20 crosses using w 1118 males homozygous for a wild-type (Oregon-R) copy of chromosome 2 ( w 1118 ;ORC2 iso ) were set up. For the fertility rescue assays, 20 individual spag4 homozygous males bearing a single copy of the transgene pC4-spag4 , pC4-spag4 : gfp , pC4-spag4 : 6xmyc or pC4-spag4-SUNstop were used. To assay female fertility, 20 virgin spag4 homozygous or spag4/Df(2L)Prl females were assayed individually with two w 1118 males. Similar crosses with w 1118 ; ORC2 iso virgin females were set up in parallel as wild-type controls. After 1 week, average combined numbers of larvae and pupae per vial were determined.

Testes were fixed on ice for 2 hours in PBS with 2% glutaraldehyde [Electron Microscopy Sciences (EMS), Hatfield, PA], rinsed, then post-fixed at room temperature for 2 hours in 2% OsO 4 (EMS) and 0.8% K 3 [Fe(CN) 6 ] in 1× symcollidine buffer ( McDonald, 1984 ; Jinguji and Ishikawa, 1990 ). Tissues were then dehydrated and embedded in resin using standard procedures. 50-60 nm sections were cut, stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and examined with a Philips EM208 electron microscope.

Testes were fixed and stained essentially as described ( Lin et al., 1996 ; Zhong and Belote, 2007 ; Texada et al., 2008 ), and mounted in VectaShield (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) or 50% glycerol. Primary antibody dilutions were as follows: mouse anti-MYC, 1:2000; rabbit anti-MYC, 1:200; rabbit anti-CM1, 1:100 (all from Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA); rabbit anti-Vasa, 1:200 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA); mouse anti-γ-tubulin, 1:500 (Sigma) and chicken anti-Yuri, 1:400 ( Texada et al., 2008 ). Secondary antibodies were Alexa Fluor 488 anti-rabbit, Alexa Fluor 555 or Alexa Fluor 568 anti-mouse and Alexa Fluor 488 anti-chicken, all at 1:500 (Invitrogen). Alexa Fluor phalloidin (Invitrogen) to stain F-actin and TOPRO-3 to stain DNA, were mixed into secondary antibody solutions at 15 μl phalloidin/ml and 1 μl/ml TOPRO-3. DAPI for DNA staining was added to mounting solution at 1 μl/ml. Testes were imaged with Leica AOBS SP2 and Zeiss LSM 510 laser-scanning confocal microscopes and a Zeiss Axioplan microscope using Metamorph deconvolution software. Adobe Photoshop was used to process all images.

ISH was carried out essentially as described ( White-Cooper et al., 1998 ), using an 820 bp PCR product from the spag4 ORF to generate sense and antisense probes by in vitro transcription with a DIG RNA Labeling Kit (Roche).

We are grateful to C. Schmidt for critically reviewing this manuscript, to Y. Yamashita for support, to C. Gonzalez and T. Hays for providing flies and reagents, and to K. Lea for assistance with generating the pW35-spag4 HRKO construct. This work was supported by a grant from the National Eye Institute (RO1-EY13958) to J.A.F and grants C-1119 from the Welch Foundation of Texas and NNX09AH43G from NASA to K.M.B. Deposited in PMC for release after 12 months.

Supplementary material available online at http://jcs.biologists.org/cgi/content/full/123/16/2763/DC1

This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.

Articles from Journal of Cell Science are provided here courtesy of Company of Biologists

Connect with NLM

National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894